PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT



CausalRoadmap
An LLM-Assisted Causal Inference
Exploratory & Estimation Pipeline

Built on the Petersen–van der Laan Causal Roadmap
with hardware-aware local LLM orchestration and comprehensive method
coverage




Author: Brennan Kelley · B.S. Computational Data Science, Utah Valley University
Provisional codename: CausalRoadmap (rename considered — see §32)
Document status: v0.3 — flagging system as LLM foundation, plus v0.2 PhD
methods, dataset-locking, audit, federation




Predecessor: CausalRAG (TCGA-BRCA precision oncology proof-of-concept, ACIC 2026 poster).
This document specifies the next-generation, domain-agnostic Python package.




                       CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 1 of 136
Contents




           CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 2 of 136
1. Executive Summary
This document specifies the design of CausalRoadmap, a general-purpose, LLM-
assisted causal inference exploratory and estimation package for Python. It is the
next-generation successor to the CausalRAG proof-of-concept presented at ACIC
2026 — a precision oncology pipeline that used statistical power as a pre-filter,
retrieval-augmented LLM hypothesis generation, a three-layer hallucination
prevention gate, and DoWhy + EconML for double machine learning estimation.
The next-generation package generalizes that work along five major axes.
   •   Domain-agnostic data ingestion from CSV files, Parquet, SQL databases,
       NoSQL stores, and REST APIs — replacing the original PubMed-specific
       retrieval stage.
   •   A two-step Discovery & Domain Expertise phase in which the local LLM acts
       first as an investigator (extracting per-column meaning) and then as a
       domain expert (providing context, identifying treatments, confounders,
       mediators, colliders, instruments, and unmeasured-confounder candidates).
   •   A flexible feasibility filter (statistical power and sample size) that can be
       configured manually, calibrated by the LLM, or expanded with data-type-
       aware checks.
   •   Two hypothesis pathways — a manual mode for the causal-inference
       specialist and an automated mode in which the LLM proposes a ranked set of
       high-impact testable hypotheses (with a configurable share devoted to
       counterfactual queries).
   •   Strict adherence to the Petersen–van der Laan Causal Roadmap for every
       hypothesis: separating the scientific question from the statistical estimation
       problem through eight rigorously-defined steps.
The package targets three tiers of users with sensible defaults for each: applied
data scientists who want power without writing custom code; academic causal-
inference researchers who require flexibility and methodological depth; and domain
experts with limited statistical background who need guardrails. Comprehensive
method coverage spans the modern Python ecosystem (DoWhy, EconML, CausalML,
DoubleML, causal-learn, lingam, Tigramite) plus an rpy2 bridge to leading R
packages (grf with Causal Survival Forests, lmtp, tlverse / tmle3 / sl3, sensemakr,
MatchIt, marginaleffects, bnlearn, mediation, survRM2).
Local LLM orchestration uses Ollama exclusively. Hardware detection at install time
chooses the largest reasoning-capable open-weights model the user's machine can
run, with 16 billion parameters as the floor — meaning a DeepSeek-R1 14–16B-class
distillation, Qwen3-14B, or equivalent. The package never requires a cloud API key.
The deliverable for v0.1 is a working pipeline that takes a raw dataset and a one-
sentence research question, produces a domain-expert profile, generates ranked
hypotheses, runs the eight-step Causal Roadmap for each, and emits a reproducible
HTML report. The deliverable for v1.0 is a full ecosystem of estimators, sensitivity


                     CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 3 of 136
tools, and a plugin API rivaling DoWhy + EconML in coverage while uniquely offering
end-to-end LLM-assisted exploration.




                    CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 4 of 136
2. Vision & Design Principles
CausalRoadmap exists because the gap between observational data and credible
causal claims is widening, not narrowing. Modern tabular datasets carry hundreds of
columns whose meaning is ambiguous; the analyst who once spent a week
understanding the data now skips that step or substitutes intuition. The package
treats data discovery as a first-class problem and treats causal claims as
constrained statistical statements that must pass identifiability, positivity, and
sensitivity checks before they appear in a report.

2.1 Vision statement
A single Python package that takes any tabular dataset — clinical, financial,
behavioral, industrial — and walks a user from raw rows to a published-quality
causal analysis without abdicating analyst judgment. The LLM is a structured prior
over hypotheses, variable roles, and DAGs; the statistical engine is the verifier and
final arbiter.

2.2 Ten design principles
   1. Causal Roadmap as backbone. Every hypothesis goes through the eight
      Petersen–van der Laan steps. The scientific question (Step 1) and the
      statistical estimand (Step 6) are never collapsed. The architecture mirrors the
      methodology.
   2. LLM proposes, statistics disposes. Every LLM-generated artifact —
      variable role, DAG edge, hypothesis triple — is structurally validated,
      statistically checked, and overridable. The LLM is never the final arbiter of a
      causal claim.
   3. Local by default. Ollama is the only required LLM backend. The package
      runs offline. A cloud LLM is an explicit, opt-in escape hatch reserved for v1.0.
   4. Hardware-aware. On install the package profiles the user's CPU, GPU,
      VRAM, and unified RAM, then selects the largest reasoning-capable open-
      weights model that fits. The hard floor is 16B-class (Qwen3-14B, DeepSeek-
      R1-14B distillation, or equivalent).
   5. Data-flag-driven dispatch. Phase 1 discovery emits a typed flag set
      (continuous_treatment, right_censored_outcome, longitudinal,
      mixed_exposure, etc.) that propagates downstream. Every method in the
      catalog declares which flag combinations it supports; dispatch is automatic.
   6. Comprehensive method coverage. Python where possible, R-bridged
      where necessary. No defensible method should be inaccessible to a Python
      user.
   7. Triangulation by default. Multiverse analysis, cross-DAG robustness, and
      cross-estimator ensembles are not opt-in features — they are the default
      reporting frame.



                     CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 5 of 136
8. Identifiability is a hard gate. Step 5 of the Causal Roadmap blocks
   estimation by default if the requested estimand is not identifiable from the
   chosen DAG. Override requires an explicit flag and is logged prominently in
   the report.
9. Tiered defaults, not tiered capabilities. Data-scientist, academic, and
   domain-expert tiers differ only in defaults, prompts, and which knobs are
   surfaced — never in what is reachable.
10.Honest provenance. Every LLM call records model digest, prompt version,
   seed, and timestamp. Every estimator records backend version. Every user
   override is preserved as a diff against the LLM's original suggestion.




                 CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 6 of 136
3. Naming & Positioning
The original project is called CausalRAG. That name is already taken by Wang, Han,
Singh, Ma, and Chaudhary's ACL Findings 2025 paper, which integrates causal
graphs into retrieval. Continuing under the same name invites confusion in
conference conversations, citation searches, and PyPI.
The provisional new name for this package is CausalRoadmap, reflecting its faithful
implementation of the Petersen–van der Laan eight-step roadmap as the
architectural backbone. Alternative candidates considered:
 Candidate          Pros                                 Cons

 CausalRoadmap      Direct mapping to the                Slightly long; tightly couples brand to
                    methodology; signals rigor;          one framework
                    unique on PyPI

 causality-lab      Welcoming, exploratory tone          Generic; many similar names exist

 pywhy-explorer     Signals PyWhy ecosystem              Requires PyWhy organizational buy-in;
                    alignment                            pre-empts namespace

 drcausal           Short; doubly-robust +               Cryptic; sounds like a brand of medical
                    discovery                            software

 causalkit          Memorable; suggests breadth          Generic
Final naming will be decided before v0.1 PyPI release; this document uses
CausalRoadmap throughout. Section 32 documents the decision criteria.




                    CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 7 of 136
4. The Causal Roadmap as Architectural Spine
The Causal Roadmap, developed by Maya Petersen and Mark van der Laan at UC
Berkeley, is the methodological backbone of CausalRoadmap. It is a cornerstone of
the Targeted Learning ecosystem and is widely discussed at modern statistical
gatherings such as the American Causal Inference Conference. The Roadmap forces
a strict separation between the abstract scientific question and the statistical
estimation problem — a separation that becomes architecturally essential when
constructing LLM-assisted causal pipelines, because it pinpoints exactly where
natural-language reasoning ends and rigorous statistics begins.

4.1 The eight steps
In its canonical form the Roadmap consists of eight steps. Each step appears as an
explicit phase in CausalRoadmap's per-hypothesis pipeline. The package never
silently skips a step; every hypothesis carries a complete record of its journey
through all eight.
 Ste   Name                       Question it answers                              CausalRoadmap
 p                                                                                 module

 1     Specify the Causal         What scientific question are we asking, in       roadmap.q1_quest
       Question                   plain language?                                  ion

 2     Define the Causal          What do we assume about the data-                roadmap.q2_model
       Model                      generating process? (DAG / NPSEM)

 3     Define the Causal          What counterfactual quantity formalizes the      roadmap.q3_estim
       Estimand                   question?                                        and

 4     Specify the Observed       What is actually measured, how, when, with       roadmap.q4_data
       Data                       what missingness?

 5     Assess Identifiability     Can the causal estimand be calculated from       roadmap.q5_ident
                                  observed data under our assumptions?             ify

 6     Define the Statistical     What statistical functional of the observed-     roadmap.q6_stati
       Estimand                   data distribution maps to the causal             stical_estimand
                                  estimand?

 7     Estimate the Statistical   What estimator do we apply, and what are its     roadmap.q7_estim
       Estimand                   statistical properties?                          ate

 8     Interpret the Results      What do the numbers mean back in the             roadmap.q8_inter
                                  language of the question, and how robust are     pret
                                  they?


4.2 Why this matters architecturally
LLM-assisted causal pipelines are particularly vulnerable to a specific failure mode:
conflating the scientific question with whatever statistical procedure is convenient.
An LLM, asked "does X cause Y," will happily produce a regression coefficient, a
Pearson correlation, or a propensity-matched difference and call any of them a
causal effect. The Roadmap is the most precise antidote in the literature.



                         CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 8 of 136
By organizing the per-hypothesis pipeline as a literal Roadmap walk,
CausalRoadmap enforces the discipline at the architectural level. The Step 1 module
accepts natural language and produces a structured causal question; it cannot
proceed to estimation. The Step 5 module checks identifiability and either
greenlights Step 6 or routes back to Step 1 with a request to revise the question.
The Step 6 module produces a statistical functional and is the first module allowed
to talk to estimators. The Step 8 module is the only module that re-engages with
natural-language interpretation.
The cost of this discipline is that the pipeline is more verbose than a one-shot
"estimate the effect" call. The benefit is that every output is a properly conditioned
statistical claim, attached to an explicit causal question, with all assumptions
surfaced.

4.3 Roadmap-to-module mapping
Each Roadmap step is implemented as a Python submodule under
causalrag.roadmap. Steps 1, 2, 3, 4, and 8 may invoke the LLM (always with
structured-output guards); Steps 5, 6, and 7 are deterministic statistical operations
on the artifacts produced by their predecessors.
 Ste   LLM involvement                  Statistical operations                     Output object
 p

 1     Yes — translate user prompt      None                                       CausalQuestion

 2     Yes — propose DAG, role          Statistical consistency checks (CI         CausalModel
       candidates                       tests, fast PC)

 3     Yes — pick estimand class        None                                       CausalEstimand

 4     Optional — temporal-order        Deterministic profiling;                   ObservedDataSpec
       narrative                        missingness; censoring detection

 5     No                               DoWhy do-calculus; ID algorithm;           IdentificationResul
                                        positivity diagnostics                     t

 6     No                               Functional translation; canonical          StatisticalEstimand
                                        form

 7     No                               Estimator dispatch via data-flag           EstimationResult
                                        routing

 8     Yes — narrative                  Sensitivity (E-value, sensemakr,           Interpretation
       interpretation                   Rosenbaum, multiverse)




                         CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 9 of 136
5. Pipeline Overview
CausalRoadmap reorders the original CausalRAG pipeline so that data discovery and
domain expertise are first-class, the feasibility filter is data-type-aware, and the per-
hypothesis stage is the full Causal Roadmap. The high-level flow has seven phases.

5.1 The seven phases at a glance
 Ph      Name                         Inputs                            Outputs
 ase

 0       Initialization               User project name; tier           Project skeleton; doctor report
                                      preference

 1       Discovery & Domain           Dataset (any source); optional    DiscoveryReport with flags, roles,
         Expertise                    research question                 candidate DAGs, domain context

 2       Feasibility Filter           DiscoveryReport                   FeasibilityReport — admissible
                                                                        (treatment, outcome) pairs by power
                                                                        and N

 3       Hypothesis Pathway           FeasibilityReport; mode           HypothesisQueue — ranked,
                                      (manual / automated);             scoped, falsifiable hypotheses
                                      counterfactual ratio

 4       Per-Hypothesis               Each hypothesis                   Steps 1–8 artifacts; multiverse if
         Causal Roadmap                                                 enabled

 5       Sensitivity &                Estimation results                E-values; sensemakr; Rosenbaum;
         Robustness                                                     multiverse curves; triangulation

 6       Reporting &                  All artifacts                     HTML / PDF / Quarto report; BH-
         Aggregation                                                    adjusted summary table;
                                                                        provenance log


5.2 Phase-to-Roadmap mapping
Phases 0–3 of CausalRoadmap establish the inputs that the Causal Roadmap
(Phases 4–6) consumes. Specifically:
     •   Phase 1 discovery produces the raw material for Step 2 (causal model) and
         Step 4 (observed data).
     •   Phase 2 feasibility ensures Step 5 (identifiability) and Step 7 (estimation) can
         succeed before resources are spent.
     •   Phase 3 hypothesis generation produces Step 1 (causal question) and seeds
         Step 3 (causal estimand).
     •   Phase 4 is the literal Causal Roadmap walk for every hypothesis: eight
         Roadmap steps per hypothesis, executed in order, with checkpoints between
         steps.
     •   Phase 5 corresponds to the sensitivity component of Step 8 (interpretation).
     •   Phase 6 produces the analyst-facing artifacts that translate Step 8 into
         deliverables.



                              CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 10 of 136
6. Phase 0 — Project Initialization & Configuration
The first interaction with the package establishes the project scaffold, profiles the
hardware, and selects the LLM stack. This phase exists before any data is loaded
and answers a single question: "is this environment ready to do credible causal
work?"

6.1 Project skeleton
Running causalrag init creates the following structure inside the current directory:
my_study/
├── study.causalrag.yaml              # the central StudyProtocol
├── data/                              # input datasets (linked or copied)
├── .causalrag/
│   ├── cassettes/                     # cached LLM calls for reproducibility
│   ├── history.jsonl                  # every hypothesis ever tested
│   ├── llm.lock                       # LLM model digest + config
│   ├── hardware.json                  # detected hardware profile
│   └── env.lock                       # python + R package versions
├── reports/                           # generated artifacts (html, pdf)
└── README.md


6.2 Doctor — environment sanity check
causalrag doctor runs an environment audit and prints a structured report. It is the
first command to run after install and should be re-run when the environment
changes.
The doctor checks:
    •   Python version (≥ 3.11 required).
    •   CPU cores (physical and logical) and total RAM via psutil.
    •   GPU presence and VRAM via pynvml (NVIDIA), torch.cuda backend, or
        platform-specific probes for Apple Silicon and AMD ROCm.
    •   Ollama installation and reachability (GET /api/version, /api/tags).
    •   R installation, R version, and rpy2 importability if the rbridge extra is
        requested.
    •   Required R packages (grf, sensemakr, lmtp, MatchIt, marginaleffects,
        mediation, survRM2, bnlearn, tlverse) with installation status.
    •   Disk space available for cassettes and model storage.
With --install-r-deps the doctor will programmatically invoke utils::install.packages
inside R to fetch missing packages from CRAN. With --install-ollama-models it will
pull the recommended models for the detected hardware tier.




                        CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 11 of 136
6.3 Hardware tier selection
The doctor's output includes the assigned hardware tier, which drives subsequent
model selection. The tiers are described in detail in Section 16; the floor for the
package is Tier 2 (12–16 GB VRAM or 32 GB unified RAM), since a 16B-class
reasoning model is required for the hypothesis generation stage. Tier 0 and Tier 1
systems can still run discovery and estimation against an external Ollama host, but
the doctor will warn that local hypothesis generation will be slow or use a smaller
fallback.

6.4 Tier preference
causalrag init --tier {data-scientist|academic|domain-expert|auto} sets the default
verbosity, prompt style, and which knobs are exposed by default. Tier is editable in
study.causalrag.yaml and can be overridden per command. The tier affects defaults
only; every capability is reachable from every tier.




                   CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 12 of 136
7. Phase 1 — Data Discovery & Domain Expertise
Acquisition
Phase 1 is the most architecturally important contribution of this package. It
replaces the manual data-prep step that derails most observational causal analyses
with a structured, LLM-assisted, statistically-grounded discovery workflow. The
phase has five sub-stages.

7.1 Stage 1a — Multi-source data ingestion
The data loader is implemented in causalrag.data.connectors with a uniform
Connector protocol. Every supported source must implement to_arrow() (returning a
pyarrow Table), describe() (returning lightweight metadata), and supports_lazy().
The connectors shipped with v0.1:
 Source                    Reader                            Notes

 CSV / TSV                 pyarrow.csv with type             Type sniffing; UTF-8 only by default
                           inference; pandas fallback

 Parquet                   pyarrow.parquet                   Predicate pushdown supported;
                                                             partitioned datasets supported

 Feather / Arrow IPC       pyarrow.feather                   Native zero-copy

 JSON / JSONL              pyarrow.json                      Auto-flattens nested records; warns on
                                                             heterogeneous schemas

 Excel (.xlsx)             openpyxl or calamine              Sheet selection; merged-cell warnings

 SQL (Postgres, MySQL,     SQLAlchemy + connectorx           Read-only by default; explicit allow-list of
 MSSQL, SQLite,            when fast                         queryable tables; LIMIT enforced on
 DuckDB, Snowflake)                                          preview

 MongoDB                   pymongo + flatten                 Document flattening with schema
                                                             inference over a sample

 REST APIs                 httpx + JSONata-style             Pagination handling; rate-limit-aware
                           mapper

 Hugging Face              datasets                          Direct hub access for public benchmarks
 Datasets

 FHIR (clinical)           fhirpy                            v0.5+; flattens resources to tidy frames

 Stata / SAS / SPSS        pyreadstat                        Preserves variable labels and value labels
                                                             — used by LLM discovery
Loaders are lazy-imported; missing optional dependencies surface as actionable
errors. All loaders normalize to Arrow first; downstream stages consume
pyarrow.Table or pandas.DataFrame interchangeably.

7.2 Stage 1b — Deterministic statistical profiling
Before the LLM sees anything, the package profiles the dataset deterministically.
The profiler is fast (designed to complete in under 10 seconds for datasets up to 10


                         CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 13 of 136
million rows on commodity hardware) and produces a structured ColumnProfile for
every column. Profiles drive both the LLM prompts and the feasibility filter.
For every column the profiler records:
   •   Inferred logical dtype (binary, ordinal, categorical, continuous, count, time-to-
       event, date, datetime, identifier, text, geometry).
   •   Cardinality, unique-value sample (top 20 with frequencies), missingness rate
       and pattern.
   •   For continuous: mean, SD, quantiles (p5, p25, p50, p75, p95), skewness,
       kurtosis, count of outliers by Tukey-fence rule.
   •   For categorical: mode, entropy, evidence of imbalance, plausible ordinal
       ordering.
   •   Heuristic detection of: identifier columns (high uniqueness, low variability of
       length); date columns (string parses with > 80% success); duration columns
       (numeric with units in column name or values clustered around plausible
       day/week/month counts); censoring indicators (paired columns of the form
       time/event, where the latter is 0/1).
   •   Cross-column structure: pairwise correlations above a threshold; perfect
       collinearity warnings; duplicate-key detection across joined frames.
The output of Stage 1b is a compact JSON document, ~5–20 KB for typical datasets,
which becomes the primary context for Stage 1c.

7.3 Stage 1c — Column semantic understanding (LLM, investigator
role)
With the deterministic profile in hand, the LLM is invoked in its first role — the
investigator. It receives:
   •   The Stage 1b ColumnProfile JSON.
   •   The first 10 rows of the dataset (sampled to balance categorical levels).
   •   The optional user research question.
   •   Any user-provided data dictionary or codebook (if shipped alongside the
       dataset).
It is instructed to emit, per column, the following structured fields:
   •
   •   domain_meaning — a 1–3 sentence plain-language explanation of what the
       column measures, what units, how it would normally be collected.
   •   domain_tag — inferred domain (clinical, financial, marketing, education,
       manufacturing, social-science, web-analytics, environmental, other).
   •   value_interpretation — for categorical columns, an explanation of each
       modal value ("M = male, F = female"); for ordinal, the implied ordering.
   •   temporal_position — "baseline / pre-treatment / treatment-era / post-
       treatment / outcome / unknown" based on column name and domain context.



                     CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 14 of 136
   •    watch_for — a list of warning tags: high_missing, low_variance,
        suspected_identifier, suspected_target_leakage, derived_from_outcome,
        post_treatment_proxy, contains_pii.
Every response is validated against a Pydantic schema. Invalid responses are
retried up to twice with the validation error as feedback; persistent failures fall back
to flagging the column as unknown and surfacing it for analyst review.
Privacy and safety: by default the package does not transmit raw row content to
any external service. Because the LLM runs locally via Ollama, the row sample is
processed in-process. If the [online] extra is installed and explicitly enabled, the
user is shown which rows would be transmitted and is required to confirm.

7.4 Stage 1d — Data-flag emission (routing brain)
Stage 1d is the routing brain of the entire package. The flag set produced here
determines which causal methods are even considered downstream. Flags are
emitted from both the deterministic profiler (Stage 1b) and the LLM-interpreted
profile (Stage 1c), with the profiler having veto authority.
The complete flag taxonomy is described in Section 15; an abbreviated preview:
 Flag                         Trigger                              Downstream consequence

 binary_treatment             Treatment column with exactly        Enables: IPW, AIPW, PSM, all DML
                              two non-missing values               variants, T/S/X learners

 continuous_treatment         Treatment column with > 2            Enables: lmtp, txshift, generalized
                              levels and continuous dtype          propensity; disables: vanilla PSM

 mixture_exposure             Multiple treatment columns           Enables: lmtp; disables: most
                              implicated in the hypothesis         single-treatment DML

 right_censored_outcome       Paired time/event columns            Enables: Causal Survival Forest,
                              detected                             RMST, IPCW-DML; disables: vanilla
                                                                   DML on raw days

 longitudinal                 Time-varying covariates or           Enables: lmtp longitudinal, g-
                              repeated measurements                formula, MSM; disables: cross-
                              detected                             sectional methods

 instrumental_candidate_pr    LLM flagged a column as              Enables: 2SLS, DeepIV, OrthoIV,
 esent                        plausible IV                         MR-PRESSO if appropriate

 competing_risks              Multiple terminal event types        Enables: Fine-Gray, cause-specific
                              detected                             hazards

 high_dimensional             p > sqrt(n) after one-hot            Forces: regularized nuisance
                              encoding                             estimators; enables: sparse DML

 small_sample                 n < 200                              Enables: exact tests, permutation;
                                                                   disables: aggressive ML nuisance

 heavy_missingness            Any required column > 20%            Forces: multiple imputation pre-
                              missing                              step; or routes to MNAR-aware
                                                                   methods

 panel_structure              Subject-id × time tidy structure     Enables: DiD, synthetic control,
                              detected                             panel DML




                        CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 15 of 136
 Flag                        Trigger                              Downstream consequence

 single_treated_unit         Exactly one treated unit             Enables: synthetic control,
                             detected                             CausalImpact; disables: standard
                                                                  ATE


7.5 Stage 1e — Domain expert context generation (LLM, expert role)
Stage 1e is the LLM's second role — domain expert. With the column-level
investigation complete, the LLM is reinvoked at a higher level of abstraction. It
receives the entire Stage 1c+1d output and is instructed to write a Domain Expert
Brief: a structured document that, in subsequent phases, acts as a system prompt
anchor.
The Domain Expert Brief contains:
   11.A one-paragraph domain summary identifying the apparent study setting.
   12.A list of plausible treatment columns, ranked by their suitability for causal-
      effect estimation and annotated with the typical research questions they
      would support.
   13.A list of plausible outcome columns, with notes on their measurement quality,
      censoring properties, and clinical/economic interpretability.
   14.A list of plausible confounders for each (treatment, outcome) candidate pair,
      drawn from both the dataset and the LLM's pretrained domain knowledge.
   15.A list of plausible mediators and effect modifiers.
   16.A list of suspected unmeasured confounders. For each, the LLM names what
      is missing (e.g., "performance status", "household income"), why it likely
      matters, and which observed proxies might partially capture it.
   17.A list of K candidate DAGs (default K = 3), each in GML, each with a one-
      sentence rationale and a list of edges that distinguish it from the others.
   18.Domain-specific identification warnings (e.g., "in healthcare claims data,
      treatment is heavily confounded by physician selection").
Every claim in the Brief is statistically validated where possible. Confounder
candidates are run through a conditional-independence test on the data; if the test
contradicts the LLM's claim with high evidence, the contradiction is logged and the
analyst is shown both views. The Brief is the final artifact of Phase 1 and is saved as
part of the StudyProtocol.
 Why two LLM roles?
 The investigator role is narrow and column-focused, producing structured per-
 column metadata; it is allowed to hallucinate only at the cost of being trivially
 caught by schema validation. The domain-expert role is broader and synthesizes
 across columns; it would be much harder to validate if we mixed it with column-
 level extraction. Splitting the roles also lets us route the investigator to a smaller
 general-purpose model and the expert to the largest reasoning model the
 hardware supports.




                       CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 16 of 136
8. Phase 2 — Feasibility Filter
Phase 2 is the direct descendant of the bounding-box concept from the original
CausalRAG: a deterministic, pre-LLM filter that prevents the package from pursuing
hypotheses for which the data is fundamentally inadequate. Generalized to support
every flag combination, it acts as a discipline on Phase 3.

8.1 What the filter checks
For each candidate (treatment, outcome) pair surfaced in the Domain Expert Brief,
the filter computes:
   •   Sample size in each treatment arm (or sufficient density across the
       continuous treatment range).
   •   Marginal positivity: are there enough units exposed and unexposed?
   •   Minimum detectable effect (MDE) under the appropriate estimand, given the
       flagged data type.
   •   Statistical power against a plausible effect band — either a user-supplied
       band or an LLM-suggested band drawn from the domain expert's pretrained
       knowledge.
   •   Coverage of plausible effect modifiers — if subgroup CATEs are being
       considered, do the subgroups exist with sufficient n?
   •   Censoring rate (for survival outcomes) — if > 90%, downstream methods will
       be marked "signal-only, magnitude untrustworthy".

8.2 MDE calculations by data flag
 Flag combination         MDE calculator                            Notes

 binary_treatment +       Two-sample Cohen's d → statsmodels        Default; what CausalRAG used
 continuous_outcome       TTestIndPower                             in oncology

 binary_treatment +       Two-proportion power test                 Phi effect size; arcsine-
 binary_outcome                                                     transformed power

 binary_treatment +       RMST variance (Royston-Parmar             Calls survRM2 via rpy2
 right_censored_outcome   closed form)

 continuous_treatment +   Pearson r-equivalent on residualized      Dosing-curve detection if
 continuous_outcome       form, or GPS-based                        monotone

 binary_treatment +       Negative-binomial GLM power               Pre-tabulated for common
 count_outcome            simulation                                parameter ranges

 CATE in subgroup         Effective subgroup n × subgroup           Conservative — uses 0.5 × MDE
                          effect heterogeneity                      of the full ATE as default

 mixture_exposure         Sample-size-only check; full MDE not      Falls back to simulation when n
                          analytic                                  < 1000

 IV setting               F-statistic of first stage × Wald         Requires the IV candidate
                          estimator variance                        column




                      CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 17 of 136
 Flag combination          MDE calculator                            Notes

 mediation                 Joint-significance Monte Carlo (Imai et   Cached lookup table for
                           al.)                                      common NDE/NIE scenarios

 panel / DiD               Within-unit variance + treatment          Estimated via the Goodman-
                           timing variation                          Bacon decomposition

 single_treated_unit       Pre-period length × outcome volatility    Heuristic; reported with wide
 (synth control)                                                     uncertainty


8.3 LLM-adjusted thresholds
The original CausalRAG used fixed thresholds (N treated ≥ 120, power ≥ 0.70 at α =
0.05). CausalRoadmap supports three modes of threshold setting:
   19.Default. Conservative defaults: N per arm ≥ 100, power ≥ 0.70 at α = 0.05.
      Sensible for most settings; reproduces the CausalRAG spirit at slightly looser
      thresholds.
   20.Manual. User sets thresholds in the StudyProtocol or via CLI flags (--n-floor
      150 --power-floor 0.80 --alpha 0.025).
   21.LLM-calibrated. The LLM receives the dataset profile and Domain Expert
      Brief and proposes thresholds tailored to the domain. Clinical-trial-style data
      gets stricter thresholds (power ≥ 0.80, α adjusted for multiple testing);
      exploratory web-analytics data gets looser thresholds. The LLM's proposal is
      shown to the user and requires confirmation by default in the academic tier;
      the data-scientist tier accepts it automatically.

8.4 Plausible effect bands
Power depends on the assumed true effect size. Three sources of effect bands:
   •   User-supplied band: explicit minimum and maximum clinically-meaningful
       effect, possibly with prior-RCT references.
   •   LLM-suggested band: the domain expert proposes a band based on
       pretrained knowledge of the domain literature (e.g., "weekly paclitaxel in
       BRCA: 0.20–0.40 Cohen's d-equivalent on OS-days").
   •   Empirical band: bootstrapped estimate from the data itself, used only as a
       last resort because it is biased toward zero in low-signal regimes.
The chosen band and its source are recorded in the StudyProtocol; the report cites
both.

8.5 Output: FeasibilityReport
Phase 2 emits a FeasibilityReport that lists, for every (treatment, outcome) pair
from the Domain Expert Brief:
   •   Whether the pair passes all gates (PASS / SOFT_PASS with warnings / FAIL
       with reasons).
   •   The MDE achieved and the effect band used.



                       CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 18 of 136
   •   Suggested estimand types that are appropriate (ATE, ATT, CATE, RMST,
       NDE/NIE, LATE).
   •   Required data flags for downstream method dispatch.
   •   Specific deficiencies that would unlock additional methods if remedied (e.g.,
       "add 50 more controls to unlock the strict threshold").
The FeasibilityReport feeds Phase 3.




                    CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 19 of 136
9. Phase 3 — Hypothesis Pathways
Phase 3 produces the queue of testable hypotheses that Phase 4 will process. There
are two pathways: manual and automated. They share the same downstream
pipeline, so a project can mix manually-supplied hypotheses with automatically-
generated ones.

9.1 Manual mode — analyst-driven
In manual mode, the causal-inference specialist supplies one or more candidate
hypotheses through one of three interfaces: the CLI (causalrag hypothesize add --
treatment X --outcome Y --question "..."), the YAML protocol file, or the interactive
REPL (%hyp add).
For each manually-supplied hypothesis the package performs three checks:
   22.Feasibility lookup. Does this (treatment, outcome) pair exist in the
      FeasibilityReport? If yes, attach the feasibility metadata. If no, run the
      feasibility filter for this specific pair and surface the result.
   23.Identifiability preview. Run DoWhy's identify_effect against the current
      rank-1 DAG. If the requested estimand is non-identifiable, return a structured
      "what's missing" report: which variables (named by domain meaning) would
      have to be measured or which assumptions would have to be modified for the
      hypothesis to be testable. This is the diagnostic the original prompt
      mentioned.
   24.LLM critique. The LLM, acting as the domain expert, returns a one-
      paragraph critique of the hypothesis: is it specific enough, is the estimand
      class right, is there a known confounding hazard, would a CATE be more
      informative than an ATE?
Manual hypotheses are queued whether or not they pass all checks; failing
hypotheses are flagged but still run through Phase 4 so the analyst sees the explicit
Step 5 (identifiability) report. This is intentional: refusing to run them would hide the
very diagnostic the analyst needs.

9.2 Automated mode — LLM-driven, impact-ranked
In automated mode, the LLM enters a generation loop. The loop is configured by:
   •   N (default 10) — the total number of hypotheses to produce.
   •   counterfactual_ratio (default 0.3) — the share of hypotheses that should be
       counterfactual queries ("What would Y have been under X = 1?") versus
       straightforward effect-size questions ("What is the ATE of X on Y?").
   •   estimand_distribution — preferred mix across ATE, ATT, CATE, RMST,
       NDE/NIE.
   •   novelty_bias — penalty applied to hypotheses similar to those already in the
       history.



                     CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 20 of 136
   •   temperature_schedule — start at 0.4 for the highest-impact hypotheses,
       increase to 0.7 for the tail to encourage diversity.

9.2.1 Generation loop
   25.Seed. Build the prompt context: FeasibilityReport, Domain Expert Brief,
      hypothesis history (already-tested hypotheses), data flags, and the user's
      optional research question.
   26.Propose. Ask the LLM to propose a batch of M = N × 2 candidate
      hypotheses. Each candidate must specify treatment, outcome, optional effect
      modifiers, estimand class, expected direction, expected magnitude, and a
      one-sentence impact rationale ("why does answering this matter?").
   27.Validate. Drop candidates that reference phantom variables, fail feasibility,
      propose unidentifiable estimands, or are structural duplicates of history
      entries.
   28.Score. Each surviving candidate gets a scalar impact score combining: (a)
      LLM-rated importance, (b) statistical power achieved under the assumed
      effect, (c) novelty vs. history, (d) coverage of the treatment × outcome ×
      modifier space, (e) preference for specific over general (CATE > ATE when
      defensible).
   29.Rank and select. Maximal-marginal-relevance reranker enforces coverage;
      pick the top N. Enforce the counterfactual_ratio by re-balancing if the natural
      top-N is skewed.
   30.Emit. The selected hypotheses are emitted as a HypothesisQueue, each
      annotated with its score components and provenance.

9.2.2 The counterfactual share
Counterfactual questions (e.g., "What would the mortality rate have been if every
patient had received Drug A instead of Drug B?") are scientifically distinct from
effect-size questions and call for different statistical treatments. CausalRoadmap
surfaces the distinction explicitly because it is the single most common point of
confusion in applied causal work.
The counterfactual_ratio parameter (default 0.30) controls what share of the
hypothesis queue is devoted to counterfactual queries versus effect-size queries.
Counterfactual hypotheses route preferentially to estimators that produce full
counterfactual distributions (lmtp, g-computation, BCF) rather than estimators that
produce a single average (LinearDML, simple AIPW). The default 0.30 share reflects
the empirical balance in modern applied work and can be raised to 1.0 for explicitly
counterfactual studies (e.g., policy simulation) or lowered to 0.0 for pure-discovery
exploration.

9.3 Impact scoring details
The impact score is computed as a weighted geometric mean of normalized
component scores in [0, 1]:



                    CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 21 of 136
Impact = w_imp · LLM_importance
       + w_pow · Power_achieved
       + w_nov · Novelty
       + w_cov · Coverage_contribution
       + w_spec · Specificity_bonus
       + w_iden · Identifiability_confidence


Defaults: w_imp = 0.30, w_pow = 0.20, w_nov = 0.15,
          w_cov = 0.15, w_spec = 0.10, w_iden = 0.10
All weights are exposed in the StudyProtocol for tuning. The academic tier defaults
to weights that favor identifiability and power; the data-scientist tier weights LLM
importance and coverage more heavily.

9.4 Hybrid mode
In practice most projects mix the two pathways. A specialist supplies three or four
hypotheses they care about; the LLM fills the remaining slots with high-impact
suggestions. The HypothesisQueue is a single ordered list with provenance flags
(manual / automated / overridden) on each entry.




                     CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 22 of 136
10. Phase 4 — Causal Roadmap Per Hypothesis
Phase 4 is the methodological core of CausalRoadmap. For every hypothesis in the
queue, the package executes the eight steps of the Petersen–van der Laan Causal
Roadmap in order. Steps cannot be skipped; the artifacts of each step are persisted;
failures are surfaced rather than swallowed.
This section documents each step in terms of inputs, processing, outputs, and which
modules of the package are responsible.

10.1 Step 1 — Specify the Causal Question
Inputs
   •     A hypothesis entry from the HypothesisQueue (manual or automated).
   •     The Domain Expert Brief from Phase 1.
   •     Optional analyst clarifications captured in the REPL or YAML.
Processing
The LLM produces a structured CausalQuestion object with five fields:
   •     exposure — the hypothetical intervention in domain language (e.g.,
         "prescribing weekly paclitaxel at first-line for stage II breast cancer").
   •     comparator — the counterfactual condition (e.g., "no paclitaxel" or
         "standard-of-care chemotherapy without taxanes").
   •     outcome — the response of interest in domain terms (e.g., "overall survival
         measured in days from diagnosis").
   •     target_population — the population the answer is intended to generalize to.
   •     time_horizon — for time-to-event outcomes, the relevant horizon.
The CausalQuestion is intentionally non-mathematical. It is the language a clinician,
economist, or product manager would use in conversation.
Output



10.2 Step 2 — Define the Causal Model
Inputs
   •     CausalQuestion from Step 1.
   •     Domain Expert Brief: candidate DAGs, suspected unmeasured confounders,
         role candidates.
Processing
The Causal Model is encoded as a Non-Parametric Structural Equation Model
(NPSEM) or, in the more common simplified form, a DAG. The package supports
three encodings:



                       CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 23 of 136
   31.GML graph (default) — directly consumable by DoWhy; nodes typed with
      their causal role; latent (unmeasured) nodes labeled with the U prefix.
   32.PyWhy NetworkX ADMG — for graphs with bidirected (latent confounder)
      edges; consumed by Ananke and pywhy-graphs.
   33.NPSEM specification — for the academic tier and tlverse compatibility; a
      list of structural equations with their argument variables.
If multiple candidate DAGs survive from Phase 1, the analyst may select one or run
all of them as a cross-DAG multiverse. The default is to run the rank-1 DAG and emit
a warning if rank-2 disagrees materially.
Step 2 also runs deterministic statistical checks on the chosen DAG:
   •     Implied conditional independencies are tested on the data; violations are
         reported but do not block (DAGs are model-of-the-world, not data-fits).
   •     Acyclicity is enforced.
   •     Variable existence: every node in the DAG either resolves to a dataset
         column or is labeled as latent.
Output
CausalModel — graph object plus a manifest of which nodes are observed vs. latent.

10.3 Step 3 — Define the Causal Estimand
Inputs
   •     CausalQuestion (Step 1) and CausalModel (Step 2).
   •     Counterfactual flag from the hypothesis.
Processing
Step 3 translates the natural-language question into a formal counterfactual
quantity using potential outcomes. The estimand catalog includes:
 Estimand             Formal definition                              When used

 ATE                  E[Y(1) − Y(0)]                                 Default for binary treatment, no
                                                                     specified subgroup

 ATT                  E[Y(1) − Y(0) | T = 1]                         When the policy question
                                                                     concerns the treated

 ATC / ATU            E[Y(1) − Y(0) | T = 0]                         Rare; "what would untreated
                                                                     have gained?"

 CATE                 E[Y(1) − Y(0) | X = x]                         Effect heterogeneity by modifier
                                                                     X

 LATE                 Local ATE among compliers                      IV setting

 RMST contrast        E[min(T_surv, τ) | A=1] − E[min(T_surv, τ)     Survival outcomes, censored
                      | A=0]

 NDE / NIE            Natural direct / indirect effect through       Mediation analysis
                      mediator M




                       CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 24 of 136
 Estimand             Formal definition                              When used

 Counterfactual       F_{Y(a)} for all a ∈ A                         Stochastic interventions; lmtp
 distribution

 Modified treatment   E[Y(d(A,W))] for shift function d              Continuous / mixture exposures;
 policy                                                              lmtp

 Counterfactual       Q_τ(Y(1)) − Q_τ(Y(0))                          Distributional effects
 quantile
The estimand class is recorded in canonical form and reused downstream. If the
original hypothesis was counterfactual, the chosen estimand prefers full-
counterfactual-distribution targets (e.g., lmtp) where data flags allow.
Output
CausalEstimand — typed object with class, treatment/outcome/modifier names, and
the formal expression.

10.4 Step 4 — Specify the Observed Data
Inputs
   •     The dataset from Phase 1, restricted to the columns relevant to this
         hypothesis.
   •     Phase 1 column profiles.
Processing
Step 4 emits an ObservedDataSpec describing exactly what is measured and how. It
is the LLM-generated narrative companion to the column profile, restricted to the
variables touched by this hypothesis:
   •     Variable list with logical types, units, value ranges.
   •     Missingness rates and inferred mechanism (MCAR / MAR / MNAR) based on
         patterns and LLM judgment.
   •     Temporal ordering: which variables are pre-treatment baseline, which are
         time-varying, which are post-treatment, which are outcomes.
   •     Sample size, including any joins or filters that reduce the analytic sample
         below the raw dataset size.
   •     Censoring properties if applicable: censoring rate, evidence for non-
         informative vs. informative censoring.
Step 4 is the moment of truth for any temporality violations. If a variable the LLM
proposed as a confounder is in fact post-treatment, this step catches it and routes
back to Step 2 for a model revision.
Output
ObservedDataSpec — fully-typed, machine-readable description of the analytic
dataset for this hypothesis.




                       CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 25 of 136
10.5 Step 5 — Assess Identifiability
Inputs
   •     CausalModel (Step 2), CausalEstimand (Step 3), ObservedDataSpec (Step 4).
Processing
Step 5 is the most rigorous gate in the pipeline. It is the moment where the package
decides whether the causal estimand can be computed from the observed data
under the assumed causal model.
Identification is checked algorithmically:
   34.DoWhy do-calculus. Apply back-door, front-door, and instrumental-variable
      criteria to the DAG. Return the identified expression if successful.
   35.ID algorithm. For ADMGs with latent confounders, invoke the Shpitser-Pearl
      ID algorithm (via Ananke or a Python port). This covers identification settings
      beyond simple back-door adjustment.
   36.Untestable assumption surfacing. Enumerate the assumptions on which
      identification rests — conditional exchangeability, positivity, consistency,
      SUTVA, exclusion restriction (IV), and any DAG-specific assumptions. The list
      is preserved verbatim into the report.
   37.Positivity diagnostic. Fit a quick propensity model on the proposed
      adjustment set; check that propensity scores are bounded away from 0 and 1
      with sufficient overlap in each stratum. Marginal and conditional positivity are
      checked separately.
   38.Failure handling. If identification fails, Step 5 emits a structured "what's
      missing" report: which assumptions were violated, which additional
      measurements would restore identifiability, which alternative estimands (e.g.,
      partial-identification bounds) might still be defensible. The hypothesis can
      either be abandoned, modified (return to Step 1), or proceed under explicit
      override with the failure logged.
Output
IdentificationResult — identification expression (or failure reason), list of untestable
assumptions, positivity diagnostic, and decision flag.

10.6 Step 6 — Define the Statistical Estimand
Inputs
   •     IdentificationResult (Step 5).
   •     ObservedDataSpec (Step 4).
Processing
Step 6 translates the identified causal expression into a purely statistical functional
of the observed-data distribution. For example, under conditional exchangeability
the ATE becomes:



                       CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 26 of 136
ψ(P) = E_W[ E[Y | A = 1, W] − E[Y | A = 0, W] ]


where P is the observed-data distribution and W is the adjustment set
identified by the back-door criterion in Step 5.
Step 6 is the first moment where the package's universe is purely statistical: there
is no more reference to potential outcomes, only to expectations of observed
quantities under the empirical distribution. This separation matters because it
makes the subsequent estimation step amenable to ordinary statistical theory —
convergence rates, variance estimation, sensitivity bounds — without entangling
them with causal assumptions.
Specific translations include:
 Causal estimand                    Identified statistical estimand under back-door W

 ATE                                E[E[Y|A=1,W] − E[Y|A=0,W]]

 ATT                                E[E[Y|A=1,W] − E[Y|A=0,W] | A=1]

 CATE(x)                            E[E[Y|A=1,W=w] − E[Y|A=0,W=w] | X=x]

 RMST(τ)                            E[min(T_surv(1),τ) − min(T_surv(0),τ)] expressed via
                                    censoring-aware functional

 NDE                                Imai-Keele NDE expression with cross-world independence

 MTP (lmtp)                         E[Y(d(A,W))] under shift function d
If Step 5 yielded only partial identification, Step 6 produces a pair of statistical
functionals corresponding to the lower and upper bounds. Estimation in Step 7 then
targets both.
Output
StatisticalEstimand — canonical-form functional with all referenced variables
resolved to dataset columns.

10.7 Step 7 — Estimate the Statistical Estimand
Inputs
   •     StatisticalEstimand (Step 6).
   •     ObservedDataSpec (Step 4) and the dataset.
   •     Data flags from Phase 1.
Processing
Step 7 is where the package's comprehensive method catalog is dispatched. The
estimator registry indexes every available method by:
   •     Supported estimand classes (ATE, CATE, RMST, NDE, …).
   •     Required data flags (binary_treatment + observed_confounders,
         right_censored_outcome, longitudinal, …).
   •     Excluded data flags (vanilla DML excludes right_censored_outcome unless
         wrapped with IPCW).



                      CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 27 of 136
   •     Sample-size suitability bounds (some estimators degrade below n = 200).
   •     Backend (Python native or rpy2-bridged).
Dispatch logic finds the candidate estimators that satisfy the estimand × flag
intersection, ranks them by appropriateness (defaults preferring DR estimators with
valid inference), and runs them. The data-scientist tier picks the top candidate; the
academic tier runs an ensemble of K (default 3) and reports the multiverse.
Every estimator returns a standardized EstimationResult containing:
   •     Point estimate and 95% confidence interval.
   •     Standard error and p-value (when applicable).
   •     Sample size used.
   •     Diagnostics: overlap, balance metrics (max absolute standardized mean
         difference), nuisance-model fit quality.
   •     Refutation tests: placebo treatment, random common cause, subset
         sensitivity (DoWhy's refutation suite).
   •     Backend version and seed for reproducibility.
If the estimand is partially identified, Step 7 returns a bounded interval rather than
a point estimate; estimators that cannot produce bounds are excluded.
Output
EstimationResult (single estimator) or MultiverseResult (ensemble).

10.8 Step 8 — Interpret the Results
Inputs
   •     All artifacts from Steps 1–7.
   •     Phase 5 sensitivity outputs (computed in parallel).
Processing
Step 8 produces three complementary artifacts:
   39.Natural-language interpretation. The LLM (in domain-expert role)
      translates the numerical estimate back into the language of the original
      CausalQuestion. The translation is constrained to the actual estimate and CI;
      it cannot claim significance the data did not produce.
   40.Assumption ledger. An explicit table of every untestable assumption
      invoked along the way — conditional exchangeability, positivity, SUTVA, IV
      exclusion, and so on — with sensitivity bounds where computed. The table is
      the antidote to over-interpretation.
   41.Robustness verdict. Aggregation of Phase 5 sensitivity outputs: E-value,
      sensemakr partial R² bounds, Rosenbaum Γ, multiverse range. A traffic-light
      verdict (green / yellow / red) is computed by a defensible rule (e.g., red if E-
      value < 1.5 and at least one neighboring multiverse spec produces a CI
      crossing zero).



                       CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 28 of 136
Output
Interpretation — the artifact a non-statistician reader of the report actually sees
first.

10.9 Step-by-step gating
The Roadmap walk enforces hard gates between certain steps:
    •   Step 1 → Step 2: the CausalQuestion must name an exposure and outcome
        that resolve to columns or are explicitly hypothetical (allowed only with a
        warning).
    •   Step 2 → Step 3: the CausalModel must be acyclic.
    •   Step 4 → Step 5: every confounder in the DAG must correspond to a
        measured column (or be explicitly latent).
    •   Step 5 → Step 6: identification must succeed or the analyst must explicitly
        accept a partial-identification path.
    •   Step 6 → Step 7: at least one estimator must exist that supports the data-flag
        set.
    •   Step 7 → Step 8: at least one EstimationResult must have been produced;
        refutations must have run.
Gate failures are surfaced in the report as red banners; they cannot be silently
bypassed.

10.10 Per-hypothesis artifacts
By the end of Phase 4, each hypothesis has the following artifact tree:
hypothesis_H03/
├── q1_question.yaml
├── q2_model.gml
├── q3_estimand.yaml
├── q4_data.yaml
├── q5_identification.yaml
├── q6_statistical_estimand.yaml
├── q7_estimation/
│   ├── linear_dml.json
│   ├── causal_forest.json
│   ├── tmle3.json             # if rbridge
│   └── multiverse.json
├── q8_interpretation.md
└── sensitivity/
    ├── evalue.json
    ├── sensemakr.json
    └── multiverse_specification_curve.png
These artifacts are the source of truth for the final report and for reproducibility.




                       CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 29 of 136
11. Phase 5 — Sensitivity & Robustness
Phase 5 runs concurrently with Step 7 in Phase 4. It is conceptually part of Step 8
(interpretation) but is large enough to warrant its own phase in the architecture.
Sensitivity is not an optional add-on in CausalRoadmap — it is the empirical antidote
to the untestable assumptions surfaced in Step 5.

11.1 Sensitivity methods
 Method                            What it bounds                               Reference

 E-value (VanderWeele-Ding)        Minimum confounder strength to nullify       Ann Intern Med 2017
                                   effect

 sensemakr (Cinelli-Hazlett)       Partial-R² OVB on OLS final stage;           JRSS-B 2020
                                   robustness value

 dml.sensemakr                     Partial-R² OVB extended to DML score         Chernozhukov, Cinelli, Newey,
                                                                                Sharma, Syrgkanis 2022 — R
                                                                                only

 Rosenbaum bounds (Γ)              Bias due to differential treatment           Rosenbaum 2002
                                   assignment in matched studies

 Manski bounds                     Worst-case partial identification            Manski 1990

 Bayesian bias-parameter           Posterior of effect under priors on bias     McCandless-Greenland
 priors

 Negative-control outcome          Implicit confounding via known-null          Lipsitch 2010
 (NCO)                             association

 Specification curve /             Distribution of effects over modeling        Simonsohn et al. 2020
 multiverse                        choices

 Cross-DAG multiverse              Distribution of effects under competing      Native to CausalRoadmap
                                   causal models

 Cross-estimator triangulation     Convergence across DR, matching, TMLE        Lawlor et al. 2016 IJE


11.2 Default sensitivity plan by estimand
Each estimand class has an associated default sensitivity plan that runs unless the
user opts out:
   •   ATE / ATT (linear final stage): sensemakr + E-value + placebo refutation.
   •   ATE (matched designs): Rosenbaum Γ + E-value.
   •   CATE: sensemakr per subgroup + multiverse over alternative modifier
       specifications.
   •   RMST / survival: E-value adapted to hazard ratio + CSF-internal honest splits.
   •   NDE / NIE: Imai-Keele sensitivity to sequential ignorability violation.
   •   Stochastic intervention (lmtp): cross-estimator triangulation (TMLE vs. SDR
       vs. one-step).




                         CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 30 of 136
11.3 Verdict aggregation
The robustness verdict is computed by the following rule (configurable in the
StudyProtocol):
if E_value >= 2.0 AND |sensemakr_RV| > 0.10 AND multiverse_CI_consistent_sign:
    verdict = GREEN    # finding survives plausible confounding
elif E_value >= 1.5 OR sensemakr_RV > 0.05:
    verdict = YELLOW   # finding fragile; report as 'suggestive'
else:
    verdict = RED   # finding does not survive plausible perturbation
Verdicts appear next to every point estimate in the final report. Yellow and red
verdicts are accompanied by a paragraph explaining which assumption would have
to fail for the finding to be nullified, in plain language.




                       CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 31 of 136
12. Phase 6 — Reporting & Aggregation
Phase 6 aggregates the per-hypothesis Roadmap walks into a single coherent
deliverable. The report exists in four formats with shared content:
   •   HTML (default) — interactive, with sortable tables and collapsible Roadmap-
       step sections.
   •   PDF — typeset via WeasyPrint, suitable for sharing or supplementary
       material.
   •   Quarto — for academic users who want to extend the report with custom
       analyses.
   •   Markdown — for archival and LLM consumption.

12.1 Report structure
   42.Executive summary — one paragraph, written by the LLM under tight
      constraints (cannot claim significance beyond the data, must mention
      robustness verdicts).
   43.Domain Expert Brief from Phase 1 — context, suspected unmeasured
      confounders, candidate DAGs.
   44.Feasibility summary from Phase 2 — which hypotheses passed, which failed
      and why.
   45.Hypothesis-by-hypothesis Roadmap walk — Steps 1 through 8 for every
      queue entry, with all artifacts linked.
   46.Cross-hypothesis findings table — BH-adjusted p-values, all robustness
      verdicts, traffic-light coding.
   47.Sensitivity appendix — full E-values, sensemakr contour plots, multiverse
      curves, Rosenbaum tables.
   48.Provenance — LLM model digest, seeds, package versions, R packages (if
      rbridge used), execution time per phase.
   49.Analyst-decision ledger — every default the analyst implicitly accepted, every
      LLM suggestion overridden, every assumption explicitly asserted.

12.2 Multiple-hypothesis correction
When K > 1 hypotheses produce p-values, the package applies Benjamini-Hochberg
by default to control false discovery rate at α (default 0.05). The choice can be
overridden in the StudyProtocol to use BY (under positive regression dependence)
or Bonferroni FWER. The unadjusted and adjusted values are both shown in the
findings table; the report's headline conclusions refer to adjusted values.

12.3 Analyst-decision ledger
The single most under-appreciated source of irreproducibility in observational
causal work is the silent acceptance of defaults. CausalRoadmap solves this by


                    CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 32 of 136
recording every analyst-facing decision in the StudyProtocol with a flag indicating
whether it was explicitly set, implicitly accepted from a default, or accepted from an
LLM suggestion. The decision ledger is rendered as a sortable table in the report.
Categories tracked:
   •   Choice of confounder set.
   •   Choice of estimand.
   •   Choice of estimator.
   •   Power / sample-size thresholds in Phase 2.
   •   DAG selection from candidates.
   •   Multiple-testing correction method.
   •   Sensitivity bounds and which assumptions were defended vs. accepted.
In the academic tier the ledger is shown at the top of the report; in the data-
scientist tier it is at the bottom. In the domain-expert tier it is rendered as a
checklist with each item briefly explained.




                      CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 33 of 136
13. Package Architecture
The package follows a modular, lazy-import architecture organized by responsibility
rather than by vendor. The top-level layout:
causalrag/
├── core/                        # framework primitives — small, stable
│   ├── protocol.py              # StudyProtocol (Pydantic)
│   ├── graph.py                 # CausalGraph (wraps NetworkX, GML I/O)
│   ├── roles.py                 # VariableRole enum & dataclass
│   ├── flags.py                 # DataFlag enum & combination logic
│   ├── estimand.py              # CausalEstimand, StatisticalEstimand
│   ├── result.py                # EstimationResult, MultiverseResult
│   └── registry.py              # method registry + dispatch
│
├── data/                        # ingestion + profiling
│   ├── connectors/              # csv, parquet, sql, mongo, fhir, ...
│   ├── profiler.py              # deterministic Stage 1b
│   ├── flags.py                 # flag emission from profile
│   └── checks.py                # positivity, balance, overlap
│
├── discovery/                   # Phase 1 — LLM discovery agent
│   ├── investigator.py          # Stage 1c — column understanding
│   ├── expert.py                # Stage 1e — domain expert brief
│   ├── dag_proposer.py          # Stage 1e — K candidate DAGs
│   └── prompts/                 # versioned Jinja templates
│
├── feasibility/                 # Phase 2
│   ├── power.py                 # MDE calculators per flag combo
│   ├── thresholds.py            # default + manual + LLM-set modes
│   └── report.py                # FeasibilityReport builder
│
├── hypothesize/                 # Phase 3
│   ├── manual.py                # analyst-driven path
│   ├── automated.py             # LLM loop with impact scoring
│   ├── critique.py              # LLM critique of manual hypotheses
│   └── queue.py                 # HypothesisQueue object
│
├── roadmap/                     # Phase 4 — the 8 Causal Roadmap steps
│   ├── q1_question.py
│   ├── q2_model.py
│   ├── q3_estimand.py
│   ├── q4_data.py
│   ├── q5_identify.py
│   ├── q6_statistical_estimand.py
│   ├── q7_estimate.py
│   └── q8_interpret.py
│
├── estimators/                  # the method catalog




                        CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 34 of 136
│   ├── base.py                  # CausalEstimator Protocol
│   ├── python/                  # native python estimators
│   │   ├── dml.py               # EconML wrappers
│   │   ├── doubleml.py
│   │   ├── causalml.py
│   │   ├── matching.py
│   │   ├── synthcontrol.py
│   │   ├── meta.py              # X/T/S/DR-learner
│   │   ├── discovery.py         # causal-learn, lingam, tigramite
│   │   ├── bart.py              # pymc-bart
│   │   └── causalimpact.py
│   └── rbridge/                 # rpy2 adapters
│       ├── _r.py                # singleton R session
│       ├── grf.py               # causal_forest, causal_survival_forest
│       ├── lmtp.py              # modified treatment policies
│       ├── tmle3.py             # tlverse
│       ├── sensemakr.py         # OLS / IV / DML sensitivity
│       ├── matchit.py           # MatchIt propensity matching
│       ├── marginaleffects.py
│       ├── mediation.py         # mediation, CMAverse
│       ├── survRM2.py
│       └── bnlearn.py
│
├── sensitivity/                 # Phase 5
│   ├── evalue.py
│   ├── sensemakr_py.py          # python wrapper of PySensemakr
│   ├── rosenbaum.py
│   ├── manski.py
│   ├── bayes.py                 # PyMC bias-parameter priors
│   ├── multiverse.py            # specification curve
│   └── verdict.py               # green/yellow/red aggregator
│
├── ensemble/                    # cross-estimator + cross-DAG aggregation
│   ├── runner.py
│   ├── triangulation.py
│   └── aggregator.py
│
├── llm/                         # LLM orchestration
│   ├── ollama_client.py
│   ├── hardware.py              # detection + tier assignment
│   ├── selector.py              # auto model selection
│   ├── registry.py              # the model catalog
│   ├── guards.py                # hallucination guard layers
│   ├── cassette.py              # caching for tests + reproducibility
│   └── prompts/                 # shared prompt utilities
│
├── reporting/                   # Phase 6
│   ├── card.py                  # study summary card
│   ├── render_html.py




                        CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 35 of 136
│   ├── render_pdf.py
│   ├── render_quarto.py
│   ├── render_md.py
│   └── plots.py
│
├── cli/
│   ├── main.py                  # Typer app
│   ├── interactive.py           # REPL
│   ├── tiers.py                 # default profiles
│   └── doctor.py                # environment checks
│
└── tests/
    ├── unit/
    ├── integration/
    ├── fixtures/llm/            # cassettes for reproducible LLM tests
    └── live_llm/                # opt-in live LLM suite


13.1 Dependency layering
Modules import only from layers below them, never sideways or up:
Layer 5: cli, reporting
Layer 4: roadmap, hypothesize, feasibility, discovery
Layer 3: estimators, sensitivity, ensemble
Layer 2: llm, data
Layer 1: core
This makes the system easier to reason about, easier to test, and makes optional
features (like the R bridge) genuinely optional — nothing in Layer 1 imports from
Layer 3.




                        CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 36 of 136
14. Core Abstractions
14.1 StudyProtocol
The StudyProtocol is the central, serializable object. Every command reads from and
updates it. Reproducibility derives entirely from it.
class StudyProtocol(BaseModel):
    name: str
    version: str = "0.1"
    created: datetime
    updated: datetime
    tier: Literal["data-scientist","academic","domain-expert"]


    research_question: Optional[str]
    dataset: DatasetSpec            # source, hash, schema


    discovery: Optional[DiscoveryReport]
    feasibility: Optional[FeasibilityReport]
    hypothesis_queue: list[Hypothesis]
    roadmap_walks: dict[str, RoadmapWalk]       # keyed by hypothesis id


    flags: set[DataFlag]
    candidate_graphs: list[CausalGraph]
    selected_graph_index: int = 0


    multiple_testing: Literal["bh","by","bonferroni","none"] = "bh"
    counterfactual_ratio: float = 0.30


    llm: LLMConfig                  # model digests, seeds, hardware
    decision_ledger: list[Decision]      # every analyst-facing choice
    overrides: list[Override]       # diffs of LLM suggestions


14.2 CausalEstimator protocol
Every estimator — Python-native or R-bridged — implements the same protocol:
@runtime_checkable
class CausalEstimator(Protocol):
    id: str                   # e.g. 'rbridge.grf.causal_survival_forest'
    backend: Literal["python","r"]
    supported_estimands: tuple[str, ...]
    required_flags: frozenset[DataFlag]
    excluded_flags: frozenset[DataFlag]
    min_sample_size: int
    produces_cate: bool
    produces_full_counterfactual: bool
    propensity_required: bool


    def fit(self, data: pd.DataFrame,



                        CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 37 of 136
            protocol: StudyProtocol) -> 'CausalEstimator': ...
    def estimate(self) -> EstimationResult: ...
    def diagnose(self) -> dict: ...          # overlap, balance, residuals
    def refute(self) -> dict: ...            # placebo, subset, unobserved


14.3 DataFlag enum
DataFlags are an enum representing all routing-relevant properties of the data and
the proposed analysis. Flag emission is the responsibility of the profiler and
discovery agent; flag consumption is the responsibility of the estimator registry.
class DataFlag(StrEnum):
    # treatment properties
    BINARY_TREATMENT = "binary_treatment"
    CATEGORICAL_TREATMENT = "categorical_treatment"
    CONTINUOUS_TREATMENT = "continuous_treatment"
    MIXTURE_EXPOSURE = "mixture_exposure"
    TIME_VARYING_TREATMENT = "time_varying_treatment"


    # outcome properties
    BINARY_OUTCOME = "binary_outcome"
    CONTINUOUS_OUTCOME = "continuous_outcome"
    COUNT_OUTCOME = "count_outcome"
    RIGHT_CENSORED_OUTCOME = "right_censored_outcome"
    COMPETING_RISKS = "competing_risks"
    REPEATED_OUTCOME = "repeated_outcome"


    # data structure
    PANEL_STRUCTURE = "panel_structure"
    LONGITUDINAL = "longitudinal"
    CLUSTERED = "clustered"
    NETWORK_INTERFERENCE = "network_interference"
    SINGLE_TREATED_UNIT = "single_treated_unit"


    # design hints
    INSTRUMENTAL_CANDIDATE_PRESENT = "instrumental_candidate_present"
    MEDIATOR_PROPOSED = "mediator_proposed"
    NEGATIVE_CONTROL_AVAILABLE = "negative_control_available"


    # sample properties
    SMALL_SAMPLE = "small_sample"              # n < 200
    HIGH_DIMENSIONAL = "high_dimensional"      # p > sqrt(n)
    HEAVY_MISSINGNESS = "heavy_missingness"       # > 20%
    HEAVY_CENSORING = "heavy_censoring"           # > 70%
    POSITIVITY_VIOLATION = "positivity_violation"
    SUSPECTED_INFORMATIVE_CENSORING = "suspected_informative_censoring"




                       CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 38 of 136
15. The Data Flag System — Routing Brain
Section 15 is referenced repeatedly above; this section gives the full specification.

15.1 Flag emission sources
    Source                                 Authority           Flags emitted

    Stage 1b deterministic profiler        Veto                BINARY/CONTINUOUS treatment & outcome,
                                                               CENSORING, SMALL_SAMPLE, HIGH_DIMENSIONAL,
                                                               HEAVY_MISSINGNESS, POSITIVITY_VIOLATION

    Stage 1c LLM investigator              Suggest             All semantic flags: MEDIATOR_PROPOSED,
                                                               INSTRUMENTAL_CANDIDATE_PRESENT,
                                                               NEGATIVE_CONTROL_AVAILABLE,
                                                               SUSPECTED_INFORMATIVE_CENSORING

    Stage 1e LLM expert                    Suggest             Structure flags: PANEL_STRUCTURE, LONGITUDINAL,
                                                               CLUSTERED, NETWORK_INTERFERENCE

    Stage 2 feasibility filter             Veto                SMALL_SAMPLE (refined), POSITIVITY_VIOLATION
                                                               (refined)

    Step 4 (ObservedDataSpec)              Refine              TIME_VARYING_TREATMENT, REPEATED_OUTCOME

    Step 5 (Identifiability)               Veto                Sets IDENTIFICATION_FAILED if applicable
Conflicts between sources resolve in favor of the higher-authority source. A
deterministic emitter overrides an LLM emitter for the same flag; the analyst always
overrides both.

15.2 Flag-to-method dispatch matrix
The estimator registry exposes a query interface that resolves to candidate
methods:
registry.candidates_for(
       estimand="ATE",
       required={DataFlag.BINARY_TREATMENT, DataFlag.RIGHT_CENSORED_OUTCOME},
       excluded={DataFlag.LONGITUDINAL},
)
# returns:
# [GrfCausalSurvivalForest, IpcwDml, SurvRM2Marginal, ...]
Selected dispatch outcomes by flag combination:
    Flag combination                       Top candidate methods

    binary_treatment +                     LinearDML, CausalForestDML, AIPW, tmle3 (R), PSM (R)
    continuous_outcome (baseline)

    binary_treatment +                     DR estimator, AIPW, BCF (R), TMLE (R), MatchIt
    binary_outcome

    binary_treatment +                     Causal Survival Forest (R, grf), IPCW-DML, survtmle (R), RMST contrast (R)
    right_censored_outcome

    continuous_treatment +                 lmtp (R), txshift (R), generalized propensity DML, dose-response curve
    continuous_outcome



                               CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 39 of 136
 Flag combination                    Top candidate methods

 mixture_exposure                    lmtp (R) — primary; quantile g-computation; BKMR

 binary_treatment + longitudinal     lmtp longitudinal (R), MSM, g-formula, sequential TMLE (tlverse)
 + time_varying_confounding

 IV setting                          2SLS, DeepIV, OrthoIV, MR-PRESSO (R) for genetics
 (instrumental_candidate_presen
 t)

 mediation (mediator_proposed)       Imai-Keele mediation (R), CMAverse (R), DoWhy.gcm direct/indirect

 single_treated_unit +               Synthetic Control (Synth R or pysyncon), CausalImpact (R or py), GSC
 panel_structure

 panel_structure +                   Goodman-Bacon DiD, callaway-sant'anna staggered DiD, panel DML
 binary_treatment (DiD)

 high_dimensional +                  SparseLinearDML, Bayesian shrinkage, knockoffs for selection
 small_sample


15.3 Flag inheritance through Roadmap steps
Flags emitted in Phase 1 are inherited by every hypothesis touched in Phase 4, with
refinement permitted. For example, a dataset flagged LONGITUDINAL produces
hypotheses that inherit LONGITUDINAL by default; if a particular hypothesis chooses
a cross-sectional estimand, the LONGITUDINAL flag is replaced by a
CROSS_SECTIONAL_SLICE flag local to that hypothesis. The full inheritance and
refinement tree is recorded for provenance.




                         CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 40 of 136
16. LLM Orchestration
The LLM is a first-class component but never the sole decision-maker. This section
specifies hardware detection, model selection, prompting strategy, and the
hallucination guard pipeline.

16.1 Hardware detection
Cross-platform hardware detection runs as part of doctor and again at any LLM-
using command. Detection order:
   50.psutil → CPU cores (physical + logical), RAM total.
   51.pynvml → NVIDIA GPU count, VRAM per device, driver, compute capability.
   52.torch.cuda → cross-check VRAM and CUDA availability.
   53.Apple Silicon detection: platform.machine() == arm64 and Darwin; treat
      unified memory as VRAM-equivalent.
   54.AMD ROCm: pyrsmi or parse rocm-smi output.
   55.Ollama: GET /api/version + /api/tags to confirm reachability and installed
      models.

16.2 Hardware tier table (revised for 16B floor)
 Tier          Effective             RAM            Discovery model default       Hypothesize model
               VRAM / unified                                                     default

 T2 (FLOOR)    12–16 GB              32 GB          qwen3:14b-q4_K_M              deepseek-r1:14b-q4_K_M

 T3 prosumer   24 GB                 32–64 GB       qwen3:32b-q4_K_M or           deepseek-r1:32b-q5_K_M
                                                    gemma3:27b-q4_K_M             or qwq:32b

 T4            48 GB                 64–128 GB      llama3.3:70b-q4_K_M           deepseek-r1:70b-distill-
 workstation                                                                      q4_K_M

 T5 server     80+ GB                128+ GB        llama4:maverick or            deepseek-r1:671b-MoE (if
                                                    qwen3:72b                     multi-GPU) or distill-70b
                                                                                  q8_0

 T6 Apple      ≥ 32 GB unified       shared         size by 0.7 × unified RAM     same
 Silicon                                            budget
Systems below T2 produce a doctor warning. Two fallback options: (a) the user
points the package at an external Ollama host on a more capable machine (network
configuration); (b) the package runs in degraded mode with hypothesis generation
using a smaller model and reduced expected quality.

16.3 Model selection algorithm
On startup the selector executes:
   56.Probe hardware → produce HardwareProfile.
   57.Map HardwareProfile to a tier (using the table above).
   58.Look up tier defaults in the model registry.


                       CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 41 of 136
   59.Verify Ollama has the models installed; if not, prompt the user (or auto-pull if
      --auto-pull was set on init).
   60.Pin model digests in llm.lock so subsequent runs use the exact same model
      versions.

16.4 Quantization policy
Recommendations are anchored in the Liu et al. 2025 study on quantization effects
in reasoning models:
   •   Q4_K_M is the default at every tier — empirically near-lossless on reasoning
       benchmarks.
   •   Q5_K_M or Q8_0 is preferred for the hypothesize slot at T4+ when latency is
       acceptable.
   •   Q3_K_M or below is never recommended automatically; the analyst can opt in
       via causalrag config set llm.quant Q3_K_M and will be warned.

16.5 Reasoning vs. general-purpose split
The selector assigns three distinct model slots:
   •   llm.discovery_model — general-purpose instruction-tuned (Qwen3-Instruct,
       Llama 3.3) — fast structured-JSON output, used in Phase 1 investigator and
       expert.
   •   llm.hypothesize_model — reasoning model (DeepSeek-R1 distill, QwQ,
       Qwen3-thinking) — slower but produces deeper, more counterfactual-friendly
       proposals.
   •   llm.utility_model — smallest available — used for JSON repair, schema fix,
       brief summarization.

16.6 Hallucination guard layers (generalized)
The three-layer gate from CausalRAG generalizes to four layers for the general-
purpose package:
   61.Layer 1 — Prevention. Prompts are templated; column names, value
      labels, and allowed enum values are injected directly into the prompt so the
      LLM is constrained at generation time. Ollama 0.4+ structured output
      enforcement is used wherever supported.
   62.Layer 2 — Schema validation. Every LLM response is parsed by a Pydantic
      model. Failures retry once with the validation error as feedback; persistent
      failures fall back to safe defaults and log the failure.
   63.Layer 3 — Semantic validation. Every variable the LLM names must exist
      in the dataset. Every temporal claim is cross-checked against detected
      temporal ordering. Every IV candidate fails its relevance check on the data —
      silently — and is downgraded.




                    CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 42 of 136
   64.Layer 4 — Statistical validation. Conditional-independence claims implied
      by an LLM-proposed DAG are tested on the data. Disagreements are not
      silently overridden in either direction; they are surfaced.

16.7 Reproducibility
Reproducibility of LLM calls requires three things in place:
   •   Fixed seed passed to Ollama on every call.
   •   Pinned model digest (recorded in llm.lock; SHA from ollama show <model> --
       json).
   •   Cassette-based replay for CI and re-execution: every LLM call records prompt
       + response in .causalrag/cassettes/ keyed by prompt hash and replays from
       cache by default. The --refresh-llm flag forces a new live call.




                    CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 43 of 136
17. R Bridge Architecture (rpy2)
The R bridge is the package's largest engineering risk and its largest competitive
advantage. R hosts the canonical implementations of several methods (Causal
Survival Forest, lmtp, sensemakr extensions, MatchIt, marginaleffects, tlverse) that
have no production Python equivalent. CausalRoadmap bridges them cleanly
through rpy2 with the following design.

17.1 Lazy isolation
Nothing in core, data, discovery, feasibility, hypothesize, or roadmap imports rpy2.
The R bridge lives entirely in causalrag.estimators.rbridge and is imported only
when a user calls a method whose backend is r.

17.2 Singleton R session
rpy2 embeds R in the Python process. There is only one R session per process,
managed via @functools.lru_cache to avoid reinitialization cost:
@functools.lru_cache(maxsize=1)
def get_r():
    try:
        from rpy2 import robjects
        from rpy2.robjects.packages import importr, isinstalled
    except Exception as e:
        raise RNotAvailable(
            "Requires R + rpy2. Install: pip install 'causalrag[rbridge]'"
        ) from e
    return robjects, importr, isinstalled


def require_r_package(name: str):
    robjects, importr, isinstalled = get_r()
    if not isinstalled(name):
        raise RPackageMissing(name, hint=
            f"Run 'causalrag doctor --install-r-deps' or in R: "
            f"install.packages('{name}')")
    return importr(name)


17.3 Type marshalling
Python ↔ R data interchange:
   •   pandas DataFrame → R data.frame via rpy2.robjects.pandas2ri (activated
       only inside the bridge).
   •   numpy ndarray → R numeric / integer / logical via rpy2.robjects.numpy2ri.
   •   R results are materialized to native Python (dict / dataclass / numpy) before
       returning, so the result is picklable and can be serialized into
       EstimationResult.



                     CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 44 of 136
   •   Column names that contain '.' or special characters are sanitized to
       underscores on the way in and restored on the way out; the mapping is
       preserved in the adapter.

17.4 Error handling
rpy2 errors surface as RRuntimeError. The bridge catches these and re-raises with a
Python-side message that includes:
   •   The R function called.
   •   A reproduction snippet (the R code the bridge attempted).
   •   The R sessionInfo() at time of error.
   •   Suggested fixes (e.g., "install R package X", "upgrade R to 4.4+").

17.5 Reproducibility
Every R-bridged EstimationResult records:
   •   R version (R.version.string).
   •   R package name + version (packageVersion('grf')).
   •   rpy2 version.
   •   Random seed set in R.
This metadata appears in the report's provenance section.

17.6 Installation paths
Users can get an R-equipped environment three ways:
   65.Native install — they install R and the required CRAN packages themselves;
      the doctor verifies.
   66.Auto-install via doctor — causalrag doctor --install-r-deps invokes R from
      Python and runs install.packages() for missing dependencies. Requires R to
      already be installed.
   67.Container — ship a Dockerfile.r and devcontainer.json with R 4.4+, rpy2,
      and the full required-packages set preinstalled. The recommended path for
      users who don't want to deal with R installation themselves.




                       CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 45 of 136
18. Method Registry & Dispatch
The estimator registry is a singleton dict keyed by estimator id, populated at import
time via decorator registration. Each registration declares the supported estimands,
required and excluded flags, and a sample-size suitability range.
@registry.register(
    id="rbridge.grf.causal_survival_forest",
    backend="r",
    estimands=("RMST", "survival_probability", "CATE_RMST"),
    required={DataFlag.BINARY_TREATMENT, DataFlag.RIGHT_CENSORED_OUTCOME},
    excluded={DataFlag.LONGITUDINAL},
    min_n=200,
    description="Cui et al. (2023) Causal Survival Forest via grf R package.",
)
class CausalSurvivalForest:
    def fit(self, data, protocol): ...
    def estimate(self) -> EstimationResult: ...


18.1 Dispatch resolution
Given a StatisticalEstimand and the active flag set, the registry returns candidates
ordered by an internal priority score combining: estimand specificity (exact match >
category match), flag specificity (more required flags = more specific), backend
preference (Python preferred over R for cold-start latency, R preferred when it's the
canonical implementation), and sample-size match.
In ensemble mode the top K (default 3) candidates run in parallel; their results enter
the multiverse aggregator. In single-estimator mode the top-1 runs and a note
records what else could have been tried.

18.2 Plugin discovery
Third parties can register estimators by shipping a package that exposes a Python
entry point under the causalrag.estimators group:
# in pyproject.toml of the plugin package
[project.entry-points."causalrag.estimators"]
my_estimator = "my_pkg.estimator:MyEstimator"
At startup the registry scans entry points and loads them. This is the path for users
who want to ship a domain-specific estimator (e.g., a healthcare-specific TMLE
variant) without forking CausalRoadmap.




                      CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 46 of 136
15A. The Flagging System as LLM Foundation —
Overview
Section 15A through 15I specify the flagging system as it is actually consumed by
the LLM and the estimator registry. Section 15 introduced the flag taxonomy at the
conceptual level; this section is the operational specification. The flagging system is
the foundation the LLM uses to choose hypotheses, rank them by impact, and select
causal methods — without it, the LLM would either generate hypotheses
incompatible with the data or recommend methods the data cannot support.
The architectural commitments in this section are five:
   •   Flags are typed records, not booleans. Every flag carries a confidence
       score, a provenance trail, and a strength level (veto / strong / weak).
   •   Flag families enable LLM reasoning. The 47-flag taxonomy is grouped
       into ten families so the LLM can reason about combinations rather than
       enumerate possibilities.
   •   Hypothesis generation is flag-conditioned. The LLM prompt receives
       flags as structured input; the prompt template adapts to flag combinations
       rather than treating them as free text.
   •   Impact scoring uses flags as features. Every component of the impact
       score (power, novelty, identifiability, coverage) is computed against the flag
       profile.
   •   Method dispatch is rule-based, not lookup-based. A rule engine
       evaluates required/excluded/preferred flag combinations and ranks candidate
       methods; this is what makes the dispatch tractable at the registry's eventual
       size (50+ estimators in v1.0).




                    CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 47 of 136
15B. The Complete Flag Taxonomy
The complete flag set contains 47 flags organized into ten families. Each flag has a
canonical name (SCREAMING_SNAKE_CASE), a logical type (boolean / categorical /
numeric), an emission-source authority level, and a downstream consequence class.
The Pydantic definition:
# causalrag/core/flags.py
from __future__ import annotations
from enum import StrEnum
from typing import Literal
from pydantic import BaseModel, Field


class FlagStrength(StrEnum):
    VETO   = "veto"       # binding; no downstream override
    STRONG = "strong"     # clear evidence; overridable only with --force
    WEAK   = "weak"       # suggestive; default-tolerant
    INFO   = "info"       # informational; never blocks


class FlagSource(StrEnum):
    PROFILER        = "profiler"           # deterministic Stage 1b
    LLM_INVESTIGATOR = "llm_investigator"       # Stage 1c
    LLM_EXPERT      = "llm_expert"         # Stage 1e domain expert
    FEASIBILITY     = "feasibility"        # Phase 2
    ROADMAP_S4      = "roadmap_s4"         # Step 4 (ObservedDataSpec)
    ROADMAP_S5      = "roadmap_s5"         # Step 5 (Identifiability)
    ANALYST         = "analyst"            # explicit user override


class Flag(BaseModel):
    """Typed record of a single flag emission."""
    name: "DataFlag"                             # the enum value
    strength: FlagStrength                         # how binding
    source: FlagSource                             # who emitted it
    confidence: float = Field(ge=0.0, le=1.0)        # 1.0 for deterministic
    evidence: str                                  # one-line rationale
    parameters: dict = Field(default_factory=dict)         # e.g., {'censoring_rate': 0.42}
    emitted_at: datetime
    supersedes: list[str] = []                     # IDs of prior flags this replaces
    flag_id: str                                   # uuid for provenance


15B.1 The ten flag families
Flags are organized into families because the LLM reasons about families more
reliably than about individual flags. The families are:
 Family               Concerns                                                     Typical flag
                                                                                   count

 F1 — Treatment       Nature of the exposure variable: binary, categorical,        7
 Structure            continuous, mixture, time-varying




                        CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 48 of 136
 Family              Concerns                                                        Typical flag
                                                                                     count

 F2 — Outcome        Outcome type: binary, continuous, count, time-to-event,         8
 Structure           censoring, competing risks, repeated measures

 F3 — Temporal &     Time structure: longitudinal, panel, time-varying               6
 Panel               confounding, single treated unit, staggered adoption

 F4 —                Design-implied identification strategies: IV candidate,         5
 Identification      mediator, negative control, frontdoor admissibility
 Hooks

 F5 — Sample         Sample size, dimensionality, missingness patterns,              5
 Adequacy            censoring intensity

 F6 — Positivity &   Positivity violations, support gaps, overlap deficiency,        5
 Support             comparator availability

 F7 — Confounding    Strength and type of confounding, instrument relevance,         3
 Profile             mediator pathway clarity

 F8 — Network &      SUTVA violations, spillover risk, clustering, network           3
 Interference        structure

 F9 — Special        Synthetic control, DiD, regression discontinuity,               3
 Designs             encouragement design

 F10 — Quality       Suspected leakage, measurement error, proxy treatment,          2
 Hazards             post-treatment confounder
Total: 47 flags. The number is large but the families are small. The LLM prompt
presents flags grouped by family with a one-sentence summary of which families
fire, then itemizes the flags within fired families.

15B.2 The full enumeration
class DataFlag(StrEnum):
    # ===== F1: Treatment Structure =====
    BINARY_TREATMENT = "binary_treatment"
    CATEGORICAL_TREATMENT = "categorical_treatment"                      # > 2 unordered levels
    ORDINAL_TREATMENT = "ordinal_treatment"                              # ordered levels
    CONTINUOUS_TREATMENT = "continuous_treatment"
    MIXTURE_EXPOSURE = "mixture_exposure"                                # multiple co-administered
    TIME_VARYING_TREATMENT = "time_varying_treatment"
    DOSE_RESPONSE_REQUESTED = "dose_response_requested"                  # analyst wants CDRC


    # ===== F2: Outcome Structure =====
    BINARY_OUTCOME = "binary_outcome"
    CATEGORICAL_OUTCOME = "categorical_outcome"
    CONTINUOUS_OUTCOME = "continuous_outcome"
    COUNT_OUTCOME = "count_outcome"
    RIGHT_CENSORED_OUTCOME = "right_censored_outcome"
    INTERVAL_CENSORED_OUTCOME = "interval_censored_outcome"
    COMPETING_RISKS = "competing_risks"
    REPEATED_OUTCOME = "repeated_outcome"




                       CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 49 of 136
# ===== F3: Temporal & Panel =====
LONGITUDINAL = "longitudinal"
PANEL_STRUCTURE = "panel_structure"
TIME_VARYING_CONFOUNDING = "time_varying_confounding"
STAGGERED_ADOPTION = "staggered_adoption"                      # DiD-relevant
SINGLE_TREATED_UNIT = "single_treated_unit"
INTERRUPTED_TIME_SERIES = "interrupted_time_series"            # ITSA / CausalImpact


# ===== F4: Identification Hooks =====
INSTRUMENTAL_CANDIDATE_PRESENT = "instrumental_candidate_present"
MEDIATOR_PROPOSED = "mediator_proposed"
NEGATIVE_CONTROL_AVAILABLE = "negative_control_available"
FRONTDOOR_ADMISSIBLE = "frontdoor_admissible"                  # rare; flag with care
RUNNING_VARIABLE_PRESENT = "running_variable_present"          # RDD


# ===== F5: Sample Adequacy =====
SMALL_SAMPLE = "small_sample"                                  # n < 200
HIGH_DIMENSIONAL = "high_dimensional"                          # p > sqrt(n)
HEAVY_MISSINGNESS = "heavy_missingness"                        # > 20% in required col
HEAVY_CENSORING = "heavy_censoring"                            # > 70%
EXTREMELY_HEAVY_CENSORING = "extremely_heavy_censoring"        # > 90% (signal-only)


# ===== F6: Positivity & Support =====
POSITIVITY_VIOLATION = "positivity_violation"
SUPPORT_GAP_CONTINUOUS = "support_gap_continuous"              # non-overlap regions
OVERLAP_DEFICIT = "overlap_deficit"                            # binary; p̂ near 0 or 1
COMPARATOR_MISSING = "comparator_missing"                      # target-trial arm absent
EXTRAPOLATION_REQUIRED = "extrapolation_required"


# ===== F7: Confounding Profile =====
STRONG_CONFOUNDING_SUSPECTED = "strong_confounding_suspected"
SUSPECTED_INFORMATIVE_CENSORING = "suspected_informative_censoring"
UNMEASURED_CONFOUNDING_PLAUSIBLE = "unmeasured_confounding_plausible"


# ===== F8: Network & Interference =====
CLUSTERED = "clustered"
NETWORK_INTERFERENCE = "network_interference"
SUTVA_VIOLATION_SUSPECTED = "sutva_violation_suspected"


# ===== F9: Special Designs =====
SYNTHETIC_CONTROL_FEASIBLE = "synthetic_control_feasible"
DIFFERENCE_IN_DIFFERENCES_FEASIBLE = "did_feasible"
ENCOURAGEMENT_DESIGN = "encouragement_design"                  # IV via assigned-to-treated


# ===== F10: Quality Hazards =====
POST_TREATMENT_CONFOUNDER_RISK = "post_treatment_confounder_risk"
MEASUREMENT_ERROR_SUSPECTED = "measurement_error_suspected"




                 CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 50 of 136
15C. The Emission Protocol
Emission of any flag follows a strict protocol. The protocol defines who can emit
which family, with what authority level, under what evidentiary threshold.

15C.1 The emission matrix
 Family                        Profiler         LLM             LLM Expert     Feasibility    Roadma
                                                Investigato                                   p
                                                r

 F1 Treatment Structure        VETO             —               —              —              REFINE

 F2 Outcome Structure          VETO             —               —              —              REFINE

 F3 Temporal & Panel           STRONG           WEAK            STRONG         —              REFINE

 F4 Identification Hooks       —                STRONG          STRONG         —              VETO
                                                                                              (S5)

 F5 Sample Adequacy            VETO             —               —              STRONG         —
                                                                               (refine)

 F6 Positivity & Support       STRONG           —               —              VETO           VETO
                                                                                              (S5)

 F7 Confounding Profile        —                WEAK            STRONG         —              —

 F8 Network &                  WEAK             WEAK            STRONG         —              —
 Interference

 F9 Special Designs            WEAK             WEAK            STRONG         STRONG         —
                                                                               (confirm)

 F10 Quality Hazards           STRONG           STRONG          WEAK           —              STRONG
                                                                                              (S4
                                                                                              temporal
                                                                                              ity)
Reading the matrix: the profiler can emit F1 and F2 flags with VETO authority
(deterministic), F6 with STRONG authority (statistical), and so on. The LLM
investigator cannot emit F1/F2/F5 flags at all — those are reserved for deterministic
emitters. Conflicts resolve by source priority: PROFILER > FEASIBILITY >
ROADMAP_S5 > ROADMAP_S4 > LLM_EXPERT > LLM_INVESTIGATOR > ANALYST
(analyst can override anything via explicit flag override commands).

15C.2 Confidence and evidentiary thresholds
Every flag emission must include a confidence score and a one-line evidence string.
The package enforces evidentiary thresholds per emission strength:
 Strength       Minimum               Required evidence type           Effect on dispatch
                confidence

 VETO           1.00                  Deterministic computation        Hard requirement / hard
                                      result                           exclusion

 STRONG         ≥ 0.80                Statistical test or strong LLM   Default-binding; overridable




                           CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 51 of 136
 Strength         Minimum             Required evidence type            Effect on dispatch
                  confidence

                                      agreement                         only with --force

 WEAK             ≥ 0.50              LLM single-pass with rationale    Influences ranking; never blocks

 INFO             any                 Any source                        Recorded for provenance only
Below-threshold emissions are dropped automatically and logged to the audit trail.
This prevents a low-confidence LLM hallucination from upgrading itself to a binding
flag through repetition.

15C.3 The emission API
from causalrag.core.flags import FlagEmitter, Flag, DataFlag, FlagStrength, FlagSource


class FlagEmitter:
    """Single entry point for any module emitting a flag.


    Enforces the emission matrix, threshold gates, and provenance.
    Modules never construct Flag objects directly; they call emit().
    """
    def __init__(self, audit_log: AuditLog, emission_matrix: dict):
          self.audit = audit_log
          self.matrix = emission_matrix


    def emit(
          self,
          flag: DataFlag,
          *,
          source: FlagSource,
          strength: FlagStrength,
          confidence: float,
          evidence: str,
          parameters: dict | None = None,
    ) -> Flag | None:
          """Emit a flag. Returns None if rejected by matrix or thresholds."""
          family = self._family_of(flag)
          max_strength = self.matrix.get((family, source))
          if max_strength is None or strength.value_rank > max_strength.value_rank:
               self.audit.write({
                    "event": "flag_rejected_by_matrix",
                    "flag": flag, "source": source, "reason": "source_lacks_authority",
               })
               return None
          min_conf = {FlagStrength.VETO: 1.0, FlagStrength.STRONG: 0.80,
                           FlagStrength.WEAK: 0.50, FlagStrength.INFO: 0.0}[strength]
          if confidence < min_conf:
               self.audit.write({
                    "event": "flag_rejected_by_threshold",
                    "flag": flag, "confidence": confidence, "required": min_conf,



                            CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 52 of 136
    })
    return None
f = Flag(name=flag, source=source, strength=strength,
           confidence=confidence, evidence=evidence,
           parameters=parameters or {}, emitted_at=now_utc(),
           flag_id=uuid4().hex)
self.audit.write({"event": "flag_emitted", **f.model_dump()})
return f




               CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 53 of 136
15D. How the LLM Consumes Flags — The Foundation
Section 15D specifies the exact prompt structure the LLM sees when it must reason
about flags. This is the foundation the user identified — without it, the LLM is
guessing; with it, the LLM is performing a structured task with bounded uncertainty.

15D.1 The flag-conditioned hypothesis prompt
When the automated hypothesis generator (Phase 3) invokes the LLM, the prompt
includes a structured FlagDigest block — a compact, LLM-readable summary of the
entire flag set, organized by family, with confidence and evidence shown inline. The
LLM is instructed to generate hypotheses that respect the flag set, not hypotheses
the data cannot support.
The prompt template:
# causalrag/discovery/prompts/hypothesize.jinja


You are a causal-inference research analyst. You will generate {{ N }}
testable hypotheses against a dataset whose properties are described below.


Your hypotheses MUST satisfy two hard constraints:
  (1) Every variable named must exist in the dataset schema.
  (2) The hypothesis MUST be answerable given the FLAG DIGEST below.
      Any hypothesis incompatible with the flags will be rejected by
      automated validation and you will be re-prompted.


=== FLAG DIGEST ===
{% for family, flags in flag_digest.items() %}
[{{ family.code }}] {{ family.name }} ({{ family.summary }})
{% for f in flags %}
  - {{ f.name }} [{{ f.strength }}, conf={{ f.confidence }}]
    {{ f.evidence }}
  {% if f.parameters %}   params: {{ f.parameters | tojson }}{% endif %}
{% endfor %}
{% endfor %}


=== APPLICABLE ESTIMAND CLASSES ===
Given the flags above, the following estimand classes are feasible:
{% for est in feasible_estimands %}
  - {{ est.name }}: {{ est.description }}
    required-flag-fit: {{ est.flag_match_score }}
{% endfor %}


=== DOMAIN EXPERT BRIEF ===
{{ domain_brief }}


=== HYPOTHESIS HISTORY ===
Already-tested hypotheses (avoid duplicates):




                       CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 54 of 136
{% for h in history %}     - {{ h.text }}{% endfor %}


=== TASK ===
Generate exactly {{ N }} hypotheses as a JSON array. {{ cf_n }} of them
must be counterfactual queries ('What would Y have been if A had been...').
Schema for each entry:
{
    "id": "H_<int>",
    "text": "natural-language hypothesis",
    "estimand": {"type": "<from feasible_estimands>",
                   "treatment": "<column>", "outcome": "<column>",
                   "modifiers": [...], "target_population": "..."},
    "rationale": "why this matters; <= 40 words",
    "expected_direction": "positive | negative | unknown",
    "expected_magnitude": "small | medium | large | unknown",
    "flag_compatibility": {
        "requires": [<flag_names you read as enabling this>],
        "would_fail_under": [<flag_names that would invalidate this>]
    }
}


15D.2 Why this structure works
Two design choices in this prompt are doing the heavy lifting:
        68.Feasible-estimand pre-filtering. The prompt does not ask the LLM to
           choose any estimand class — it lists only the classes already determined to
           be feasible given the flag set (see §15F for how this list is computed). The
           LLM cannot propose RMST for a dataset that has no time-to-event outcome.
        69.Self-reporting flag compatibility. Each hypothesis must declare which
           flags it "reads as enabling" and which would invalidate it. This forces the LLM
           to explicitly reason about flag combinations rather than treating them as
           decoration; the validator then compares the LLM's stated compatibility
           against the actual flag set, catching contradictions.




                         CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 55 of 136
15E. The Causal-Question Catalog Indexed by Flag
Combination
Section 15E is the menu from which the LLM selects. Rather than asking the LLM to
imagine causal questions from scratch, the package maintains a flag-indexed
catalog of 30+ canonical causal-question templates. Given a flag set, the catalog
returns the templates that fit; the LLM then specializes them with the actual column
names and domain context.
 Question template                     Required flag set                 Excluded flags     Typical
                                       (minimal)                                            estimand

 What is the ATE of A on Y in the      F1.BINARY_TREATMENT, F2.*         F6.POSITIVITY_VI   ATE
 population?                           (any)                             OLATION
                                                                         (binding)

 What is the effect of A on Y among    F1.BINARY_TREATMENT, F2.*         F6.COMPARATOR_     ATT
 the treated?                          (any)                             MISSING

 How does the effect of A on Y vary    F1.BINARY_TREATMENT, F2.*         F5.SMALL_SAMPL     CATE
 across X?                             (any), n_x ≥ 50 per stratum       E (if subgroup
                                                                         tiny)

 What is the dose-response curve of    F1.CONTINUOUS_TREATMENT           F6.SUPPORT_GAP     ADRF / CDRC
 A on Y at level a*?                                                     _CONTINUOUS at
                                                                         a* (binding)

 What would happen under a             F1.CONTINUOUS_TREATMENT           —                  MTP / LMTP
 feasible shift d(A,W)?                or F1.MIXTURE_EXPOSURE

 What is the RMST contrast at          F2.RIGHT_CENSORED_OUTCO           F5.EXTREMELY_H     RMST contrast
 horizon τ?                            ME, follow-up ≥ τ                 EAVY_CENSORING
                                                                         (translates)

 What is the survival probability      F2.RIGHT_CENSORED_OUTCO           —                  S(t | A=1) − S(t |
 difference at t?                      ME, n at risk ≥ 30 at t                              A=0)

 What is the NDE through mediator      F4.MEDIATOR_PROPOSED, no          —                  NDE
 M?                                    F10.POST_TREATMENT_CONF
                                       OUNDER_RISK on M

 What is the NIE through mediator      F4.MEDIATOR_PROPOSED              —                  NIE
 M?

 What is the LATE in compliers?        F4.INSTRUMENTAL_CANDIDAT          no F4.* would      LATE / Wald
                                       E_PRESENT                         mean no IV
                                                                         available

 What is the time-varying ATE under    F3.LONGITUDINAL,                  —                  Longitudinal
 regime g?                             F3.TIME_VARYING_CONFOUND                             regime contrast
                                       ING                                                  (LTMLE / LMTP)

 What would Y have been at site k      F3.PANEL_STRUCTURE,               —                  Synthetic-control
 under intervention a?                 F3.SINGLE_TREATED_UNIT                               counterfactual

 What was the immediate impact of      F3.INTERRUPTED_TIME_SERIE         —                  ITSA /
 intervention at time t0?              S                                                    CausalImpact

 Did the effect change after           F3.STAGGERED_ADOPTION             —                  Callaway-




                        CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 56 of 136
 Question template                     Required flag set                 Excluded flags   Typical
                                       (minimal)                                          estimand

 staggered rollout?                                                                       Sant'Anna DiD

 What is the rank-weighted ATE         F1.BINARY_TREATMENT +             F5.SMALL_SAMPL   RATE / AUTOC
 under prioritization rule?            CATE model fittable               E

 Is the effect of A monotone in W?     F1.CONTINUOUS_TREATMENT           —                Monotone dose-
                                       or F1.ORDINAL_TREATMENT                            response

 What is the policy value of           F1.BINARY_TREATMENT, CATE         —                V(π) — policy
 treatment rule π(W)?                  fittable                                           learning

 What share of the effect is direct    F4.MEDIATOR_PROPOSED,             —                Proportion
 vs. indirect?                         F2.* (any)                                         mediated

 What is the effect under              F3.LONGITUDINAL +                 —                Stochastic-shift
 counterfactual exposure pattern σ?    F1.TIME_VARYING_TREATMEN                           LMTP
                                       T

 Among never-takers, what would        F4.ENCOURAGEMENT_DESIGN           —                Principal
 A=1 do?                                                                                  stratification ATE
The catalog is more than convenient — it is the architectural mechanism that
bounds the hypothesis space. Without it the LLM would generate from a near-
infinite menu; with it the LLM specializes from a curated menu of 20+ templates,
each pre-validated against the flag system.




                        CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 57 of 136
15F. The Feasible-Estimand Engine
Section 15F describes the rule engine that produces the feasible_estimands list
shown in the prompt of §15D. The engine takes the current FlagSet and returns the
estimand classes that can be defended given the flags, ranked by how well-
matched the flags are.

15F.1 The matching algorithm
from __future__ import annotations
from dataclasses import dataclass
from typing import Sequence
from causalrag.core.flags import DataFlag, FlagSet


@dataclass(frozen=True)
class EstimandSpec:
    """Static descriptor of an estimand class for the registry."""
    name: str                             # 'ATE', 'CATE', 'RMST', ...
    required: frozenset[DataFlag]         # must be present
    excluded: frozenset[DataFlag]         # must be absent
    preferred: frozenset[DataFlag]        # boosts match score
    disqualifying: frozenset[DataFlag]        # absolute veto (positivity, etc.)
    description: str
    typical_method: str                   # link to registry id


class FeasibleEstimandEngine:
    """Compute the feasible estimand classes given a FlagSet.


    Used by Phase 3 hypothesis generation to constrain the LLM, and
    by Phase 4 Step 3 to validate analyst-supplied estimands.
    """
    def __init__(self, registry: "EstimandRegistry"):
          self.registry = registry


    def feasible(self, flags: FlagSet) -> list["FeasibleEstimand"]:
          """Return all feasible estimands with match scores in [0, 1]."""
          results = []
          for spec in self.registry.all():
              verdict = self._evaluate(spec, flags)
              if verdict.feasible:
                  results.append(FeasibleEstimand(
                       name=spec.name, description=spec.description,
                       flag_match_score=verdict.score,
                       typical_method=spec.typical_method,
                       rationale=verdict.rationale,
                  ))
          results.sort(key=lambda x: -x.flag_match_score)
          return results




                         CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 58 of 136
   def _evaluate(self, spec: EstimandSpec, flags: FlagSet) -> "Verdict":
       active = flags.active_names()
       # disqualifying flags veto absolutely
       for f in spec.disqualifying & active:
           return Verdict(feasible=False, score=0.0,
                             rationale=f"disqualified by {f}")
       # required must all be present
       missing = spec.required - active
       if missing:
           return Verdict(feasible=False, score=0.0,
                             rationale=f"missing required {missing}")
       # excluded must all be absent
       forbidden = spec.excluded & active
       if forbidden:
           return Verdict(feasible=False, score=0.0,
                             rationale=f"forbidden by {forbidden}")
       # score: base 0.5 + 0.1 per preferred + 0.1 per required match
       score = 0.5 + 0.1 * len(spec.preferred & active) + 0.1 * len(spec.required)
       return Verdict(feasible=True, score=min(score, 1.0), rationale="matched")


15F.2 Why "feasible" is not "identified"
A feasible estimand is one for which the data structure can support an estimator;
identification (Phase 4 Step 5) is a strictly stronger property that depends on the
chosen DAG. Feasibility is necessary but not sufficient for identification. The two-
stage separation is intentional: §15F is fast (rule-engine evaluation in
microseconds), called many times during hypothesis generation; identification
(Phase 4 Step 5) is slow (DoWhy / Ananke graph traversal), called once per
hypothesis. Front-loading feasibility into Phase 3 saves the LLM from proposing 50
hypotheses only to have 30 fail at identification.




                       CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 59 of 136
15G. The Method Dispatch Rule Engine
Section 15G is the rule engine that maps (estimand × flag set) to ranked candidate
methods. It is the operational version of the dispatch matrix shown in §15.2; the
table is a static summary, while the engine is the working code.

15G.1 Rule structure
from causalrag.core.flags import DataFlag, FlagSet
from causalrag.estimators import registry


class DispatchRule(BaseModel):
    """One rule in the method dispatch engine."""
    rule_id: str
    estimator_id: str               # registry key, e.g. 'rbridge.grf.causal_survival_forest'
    estimand_pattern: str           # 'ATE', 'CATE', or '*' for any
    required: frozenset[DataFlag] = frozenset()
    excluded: frozenset[DataFlag] = frozenset()
    preferred: frozenset[DataFlag] = frozenset()
    sample_size_min: int = 50
    priority: int = 100             # higher = preferred when multiple match
    tier_default: dict[str, bool] = {                 # tier-level defaults
         "data-scientist": False, "academic": False, "domain-expert": False
    }
    rationale: str                  # one-line explanation


15G.2 Example rules (excerpted)
DISPATCH_RULES = [
    DispatchRule(
         rule_id="D001",
         estimator_id="python.econml.LinearDML",
         estimand_pattern="ATE",
         required={DataFlag.BINARY_TREATMENT},
         excluded={DataFlag.RIGHT_CENSORED_OUTCOME, DataFlag.LONGITUDINAL,
                    DataFlag.POSITIVITY_VIOLATION},
         preferred={DataFlag.HIGH_DIMENSIONAL},
         priority=100, tier_default={"data-scientist": True,
                                        "academic": True, "domain-expert": True},
         rationale="Default DML; CausalRAG's original estimator.",
    ),
    DispatchRule(
         rule_id="D002",
         estimator_id="rbridge.tlverse.tmle3",
         estimand_pattern="ATE",
         required={DataFlag.BINARY_TREATMENT},
         excluded={DataFlag.LONGITUDINAL, DataFlag.RIGHT_CENSORED_OUTCOME},
         preferred=set(),
         priority=110, tier_default={"academic": True},



                        CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 60 of 136
         rationale="Efficient + targeted; preferred in epi.",
    ),
    DispatchRule(
         rule_id="D010",
         estimator_id="rbridge.grf.causal_survival_forest",
         estimand_pattern="RMST",
         required={DataFlag.RIGHT_CENSORED_OUTCOME, DataFlag.BINARY_TREATMENT},
         excluded={DataFlag.LONGITUDINAL, DataFlag.COMPETING_RISKS},
         priority=100, tier_default={"data-scientist": True,
                                        "academic": True, "domain-expert": True},
         rationale="Cui et al. 2023 — canonical for right-censored CATE/RMST.",
    ),
    DispatchRule(
         rule_id="D020",
         estimator_id="rbridge.lmtp.lmtp_tmle",
         estimand_pattern="MTP",
         required={DataFlag.CONTINUOUS_TREATMENT},
         preferred={DataFlag.LONGITUDINAL, DataFlag.TIME_VARYING_CONFOUNDING,
                      DataFlag.COMPETING_RISKS},
         priority=120, tier_default={"academic": True},
         rationale="Díaz et al. 2021 — the modern MTP framework.",
    ),
    # ... 40+ further rules in the v0.5 registry ...
]


15G.3 Dispatch algorithm
class MethodDispatcher:
    def candidates_for(
         self, *,
         estimand: str,
         flags: FlagSet,
         tier: Literal["data-scientist","academic","domain-expert"],
         n: int,
         max_k: int = 5,
    ) -> list["RankedCandidate"]:
         """Return ranked candidates for the given (estimand, flags) pair.


         Algorithm:
           1. Filter to rules whose estimand_pattern matches.
           2. Filter to rules whose required/excluded flag sets are satisfied.
           3. Filter to rules whose sample_size_min <= n.
           4. Score: priority + 10 per preferred flag intersected with active.
           5. Demote any rule not flagged tier_default[tier]=True by 50 points.
           6. Return top max_k.
         """
         active = flags.active_names()
         candidates = []
         for rule in DISPATCH_RULES:
               if not _estimand_match(rule.estimand_pattern, estimand):



                        CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 61 of 136
         continue
    if rule.required - active:
         continue
    if rule.excluded & active:
         continue
    if rule.sample_size_min > n:
         continue
    score = rule.priority + 10 * len(rule.preferred & active)
    if not rule.tier_default.get(tier, False):
         score -= 50
    candidates.append(RankedCandidate(
         rule=rule, score=score,
         estimator=registry.get(rule.estimator_id),
    ))
candidates.sort(key=lambda c: -c.score)
return candidates[:max_k]




              CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 62 of 136
15H. Flag-Driven Impact Scoring for Hypothesis
Ranking
Section 15H is the formula that ranks hypotheses by expected impact, used by the
automated mode in Phase 3. Every component of the score is computed against the
flag set; flags are not just routing inputs, they are predictive features for which
hypotheses are most likely to produce a usable answer.

15H.1 The score components
 Component                  Sym     How computed from flags                                    Weight
                            bol                                                                (default)

 Power adequacy             P       Inverse of MDE under (estimand, flags, n); flags           0.25
                                    determine which MDE formula applies

 Identifiability            I       1.0 if F4 hooks fire matching estimand; declines with F7   0.20
 confidence                         unmeasured-confounding flag

 Novelty vs. history        N       1 − max cosine similarity to (treatment, outcome,          0.15
                                    modifier) triples in history

 Coverage contribution      C       Marginal entropy gain in (treatment × outcome ×            0.15
                                    modifier) cube of accepted hypotheses

 LLM domain                 L       LLM-rated 0–1; calibrated by F7 confidence trail           0.10
 importance

 Specificity bonus          S       +0.1 if CATE > ATE under flag set; +0.05 if RMST is        0.10
                                    feasible (F2.RIGHT_CENSORED_OUTCOME)

 Robustness prospect        R       Number of valid sensitivity methods × inverse of           0.05
                                    F7/F10 hazard count


15H.2 The full scoring formula
def impact_score(
    hypothesis: "Hypothesis",
    *,
    flag_set: FlagSet,
    history: list["Hypothesis"],
    queue: list["Hypothesis"],
    tier: str,
    weights: dict[str, float] | None = None,
) -> ImpactScore:
    """Compute the impact score for a candidate hypothesis.


    All component scores live in [0, 1]. The aggregate is a weighted
    arithmetic mean; weights default to those in §15H.1 but are overridable.
    Returns the full breakdown so the analyst can see why a hypothesis
    was ranked where it was.
    """
    w = weights or DEFAULT_WEIGHTS[tier]



                         CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 63 of 136
    P = _power_component(hypothesis, flag_set)
    I = _identifiability_component(hypothesis, flag_set)
    N = _novelty_component(hypothesis, history)
    C = _coverage_component(hypothesis, queue)
    L = _llm_importance_component(hypothesis)
    S = _specificity_bonus(hypothesis, flag_set)
    R = _robustness_prospect(hypothesis, flag_set)
    aggregate = (w["P"]*P + w["I"]*I + w["N"]*N + w["C"]*C
                  + w["L"]*L + w["S"]*S + w["R"]*R)
    return ImpactScore(
        aggregate=aggregate,
        components={"P":P,"I":I,"N":N,"C":C,"L":L,"S":S,"R":R},
        weights=w,
        rationale=_explain(P, I, N, C, L, S, R, flag_set),
    )


15H.3 Why flags belong in the score
A naive impact score is just the LLM's rated importance. That is exactly the wrong
design — it gives the highest scores to the hypotheses the LLM is most confident
about, which is also where the LLM is most likely to be hallucinating. By embedding
flag-derived components (power, identifiability, robustness prospect) into the score,
the system rewards hypotheses that are not just "interesting" but actually
answerable from this dataset. The LLM's rating remains a component, but at 10%
weight — it informs ranking without dominating it.

15H.4 Tier-specific weight defaults
 Tier                       P          I          N          C         L         S      R

 data-scientist             0.20       0.15       0.15       0.15      0.20      0.10   0.05

 academic                   0.25       0.25       0.10       0.10      0.05      0.15   0.10

 domain-expert              0.30       0.20       0.10       0.10      0.20      0.05   0.05
Reading the table: the academic tier weights identifiability and power most heavily
and demotes LLM importance to 0.05; the data-scientist tier balances LLM rating
with power and coverage; the domain-expert tier prioritizes power (so the user sees
only hypotheses likely to yield a clear answer).




                      CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 64 of 136
15I. Anti-Pattern Detection — Forbidden Flag
Combinations
Section 15I closes the system. The combinatorial space of 47 flags includes
combinations that are logically incoherent — for example, a column cannot
simultaneously be BINARY_TREATMENT and MIXTURE_EXPOSURE. The package's
anti-pattern detector enumerates these forbidden combinations and refuses to
proceed when one is detected; the report surfaces the violation prominently.

15I.1 Catalog of anti-patterns
 Anti-pattern                        Why forbidden                                Resolution

 BINARY_TREATMENT ∧                  A binary indicator cannot also be a multi-   Profiler veto wins;
 MIXTURE_EXPOSURE                    component exposure                           LLM downgraded

 CONTINUOUS_TREATMENT ∧              Type contradiction                           Profiler veto resolves
 BINARY_TREATMENT for same
 column

 RIGHT_CENSORED_OUTCOME ∧ no         Censoring requires a time axis               Block; route back to
 time column                                                                      S4 (data spec)

 LONGITUDINAL ∧                      Single unit with no panel structure cannot   Translate to
 SINGLE_TREATED_UNIT ∧ no            support longitudinal estimation              INTERRUPTED_TIME_
 PANEL_STRUCTURE                                                                  SERIES or block

 MEDIATOR_PROPOSED ∧                 Mediator pollution; classic mediation        Block NDE; allow
 POST_TREATMENT_CONFOUNDER_R         invalid                                      direct-effect with
 ISK on mediator                                                                  warning

 INSTRUMENTAL_CANDIDATE_PRESE        IV must precede treatment                    Downgrade IV claim
 NT ∧ no temporal precedence over                                                 to candidate-only
 treatment

 EXTREMELY_HEAVY_CENSORING ∧         Estimand exceeds support                     Translate horizon via
 RMST horizon > follow-up max                                                     §18E or block

 POSITIVITY_VIOLATION (binding) ∧    Effect is unidentified without trimming or   Route to feasible-
 requested ATE                       MTP translation                              estimand translator

 FRONTDOOR_ADMISSIBLE ∧              Frontdoor requires the mediator to have      Block; route to S2
 MEDIATOR has no parents in DAG      observed parents                             (model)

 NETWORK_INTERFERENCE ∧              ATE under SUTVA violation is biased          Force route to
 standard ATE estimator chosen                                                    spillover-aware
                                                                                  estimator

 HIGH_DIMENSIONAL ∧                  Standard estimators fail; nuisance overfit   Force regularized
 SMALL_SAMPLE ∧ no regularization    certain                                      DML or shrinkage
 preference

 COMPARATOR_MISSING ∧ ATT            No comparison arm; only conditional          Block or route to
 requested                           outcome distribution available               single-arm
                                                                                  benchmark




                      CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 65 of 136
15I.2 Anti-pattern detector implementation
class AntiPatternDetector:
    """Detects logically incoherent flag combinations and routes resolution.


    Runs three times in the pipeline:
        (1) After Phase 1 — catches profiler/LLM conflicts.
        (2) After Phase 3 hypothesis-generation — catches LLM-introduced
            flag claims that contradict the dataset.
        (3) Before Phase 4 Step 7 — final pre-estimation check.
    """
    PATTERNS: list["AntiPattern"] = [
          AntiPattern(
               id="AP001",
               forbidden={DataFlag.BINARY_TREATMENT,
                          DataFlag.MIXTURE_EXPOSURE},
               scope="same_column",
               resolution="profiler_wins",
               message="Column cannot be both binary and a mixture exposure.",
          ),
          AntiPattern(
               id="AP002",
               forbidden={DataFlag.RIGHT_CENSORED_OUTCOME},
               requires_present={"_has_time_column"},        # virtual flag
               scope="global",
               resolution="block_route_to_s4",
               message="Right-censored outcome requires a paired time column.",
          ),
          AntiPattern(
               id="AP008",
               forbidden={DataFlag.POSITIVITY_VIOLATION},
               estimand_pattern="ATE",
               strength_threshold=FlagStrength.STRONG,
               scope="hypothesis",
               resolution="route_to_feasible_estimand_translator",
               message="ATE under positivity violation requires translation; "
                       "see §18E.",
          ),
          # ... 12+ further patterns ...
    ]


    def scan(self, flags: FlagSet,
                *, hypothesis: "Hypothesis | None" = None) -> list["Detection"]:
          detections = []
          for pat in self.PATTERNS:
               if pat.matches(flags, hypothesis):
                   detections.append(Detection(
                       pattern_id=pat.id, message=pat.message,
                       resolution=pat.resolution,




                         CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 66 of 136
                    severity="block" if pat.is_blocking() else "warn",
               ))
       return detections


15I.3 What happens when an anti-pattern fires
Anti-pattern detections are routed by the resolution field:
   •   profiler_wins — the LLM-emitted flag is downgraded; the profiler's veto-grade
       emission stands.
   •   block_route_to_s4 — execution halts and the analyst is directed to Step 4
       (ObservedDataSpec) to revise the data spec.
   •   route_to_feasible_estimand_translator — invokes §18E to translate the target
       to the nearest feasible estimand.
   •   force_regularized_estimator — overrides the dispatch ranking to a method
       appropriate for the actual flag combination.
   •   warn_and_proceed — INFO-level note in the audit log; the report flags the
       combination with a yellow banner.
Every detection is logged to .causalrag/audit.jsonl with the pattern id, the firing
flags, and the resolution taken. The verify subcommand (§28B) checks that every
detection was resolved — analyses that ignored an anti-pattern detection cannot
pass verification.




                     CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 67 of 136
18A. Dataset Integrity & Limitation Locking —
Overview
Section 18A through 18F introduce the architectural commitment that distinguishes
CausalRoadmap from every other causal-inference framework: every analysis is
locked to the dataset, and the dataset's limitations are the binding constraint on
what the package will compute. This is the package's answer to a specific failure
mode of modern LLM-assisted causal pipelines — the temptation to estimate
quantities the data cannot actually support, then dress the result up in a confidence
interval.
The architecture rests on five mechanisms, each documented in its own section: the
Dataset Lock, the Data Support Envelope, positivity & overlap diagnostics, feasible
estimand translation, and the Genuineness Audit. Together they enforce a single
rule: when the analyst's request exceeds what the data supports, the package
either refuses the analysis, translates the request to the nearest feasible target, or
runs it with prominent warnings — but never silently produces a number.




                    CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 68 of 136
18B. The Dataset Lock
The Dataset Lock is a tamper-evident, content-addressed record of the dataset
under analysis. It is created once during Phase 1 and never modified again. Every
downstream artifact carries the Lock's hash; analysis runs against a dataset whose
Lock does not match its provenance refuse to execute. This eliminates an entire
class of silent reproducibility failures — modifying the underlying file between runs
while preserving the protocol YAML.

18B.1 What the Lock contains
   •      dataset_hash — BLAKE3 hash of the raw bytes of every constituent file. Multi-
          file datasets (partitioned Parquet, joined CSVs) emit a Merkle root.
   •      schema_fingerprint — SHA-256 of the canonicalized schema: ordered column
          names, dtypes, and detected logical types from the profiler.
   •      row_count — pre-filter and post-filter (after dropping rows with required NA).
   •      collection_window — earliest and latest observed dates if any temporal
          columns exist.
   •      source_provenance — connector type (CSV, Postgres, FHIR), source URI
          (sanitized of credentials), and the LLM-extracted data dictionary if present.
   •      freeze_timestamp — ISO 8601 UTC at lock creation.
   •      preprocessing_lineage — every deterministic transformation applied (dtype
          casts, value-label maps, censoring-column pairing) with a hash of the
          transformation parameters.

18B.2 Implementation
from __future__ import annotations
import hashlib, json, datetime as dt
from pathlib import Path
from typing import Literal
import blake3                   # pip install blake3
import pyarrow as pa
from pydantic import BaseModel, Field, computed_field


class DatasetLock(BaseModel):
    """Tamper-evident provenance record for a dataset.


    The lock is created exactly once and frozen. Every downstream
    EstimationResult carries lock.fingerprint(); runs against a
    dataset whose computed fingerprint differs from the stored one
    refuse to execute (see causalrag.audit.LockMismatchError).
    """
    dataset_hash: str                   # blake3 of raw bytes (Merkle if multi-file)
    schema_fingerprint: str             # sha256 of canonical schema JSON
    row_count_raw: int




                        CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 69 of 136
   row_count_analyzable: int         # after required-column NA drop
   column_dtypes: dict[str, str]     # name -> logical dtype
   collection_window: tuple[str, str] | None = None
   source_uri_redacted: str
   connector: Literal["csv","parquet","sql","mongo","fhir","api","hf"]
   freeze_timestamp: dt.datetime = Field(default_factory=lambda: dt.datetime.now(dt.UTC))
   preprocessing_lineage: list[dict] = Field(default_factory=list)
   causalrag_version: str


   @computed_field
   @property
   def fingerprint(self) -> str:
       """Single 32-char identifier carried by every downstream artifact."""
       payload = self.model_dump_json(exclude={"freeze_timestamp"}).encode()
       return blake3.blake3(payload).hexdigest()[:32]


   @classmethod
   def from_path(cls, path: Path, connector: str, version: str) -> "DatasetLock":
       """Build a lock from a filesystem path."""
       h = blake3.blake3()
       for chunk in cls._iter_file_chunks(path):
           h.update(chunk)
       # ... read schema, count rows, compute fingerprints ...
       return cls(dataset_hash=h.hexdigest(), connector=connector,
                  causalrag_version=version, ...)       # remaining fields omitted


18B.3 Modifying a locked dataset
The Lock is intentionally adversarial. The only sanctioned way to change the dataset
is causalrag relock, which:
   70.Refuses to run if any EstimationResult depends on the current Lock and has
      not been explicitly invalidated.
   71.Recomputes the full Lock against the new bytes.
   72.Writes a relock_log.jsonl entry describing the diff (rows added, columns
      added, value-label remaps).
   73.Forces all downstream phases to re-run; partial reuse requires the analyst to
      mark which artifacts they certify as still valid.




                     CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 70 of 136
18C. The Data Support Envelope
The Data Support Envelope is the package's machine-readable answer to the
question: "what can this dataset actually answer?" It is computed once during Phase
1, attached to the StudyProtocol, and consulted at every phase boundary. When a
hypothesis or estimand falls outside the Envelope, the package refuses to run the
analysis at face value.

18C.1 Components of the Envelope
 Component               Defines                                    How computed

 Treatment support       For each candidate treatment column:       Generalized propensity / density-
                         the range of observed values and the       ratio classification; for binary, the
                         conditional density Pr(A=a | W=w)          propensity bounded away from
                                                                    {0,1}

 Outcome                 For each candidate outcome:                Profiler + LLM investigator output
 observability           censoring rate, missingness pattern,
                         measurement scale fidelity

 Confounder coverage     Which confounders are measured at          Stage 4 (ObservedDataSpec)
                         what time points; gaps in temporal
                         coverage

 Subgroup support        For every effect modifier × treatment      Pre-computed during Feasibility
                         cell: cell count and propensity overlap    Filter

 Time-horizon support    For longitudinal data: which forecast      From censoring distribution;
                         horizons remain identifiable as follow-    survRM2-style restricted horizon
                         up shrinks

 Intervention            For continuous treatments: which           Non-overlap ratio (Khatibi, Wang,
 feasibility             intervention shifts d(a,w) keep the        Rahmani 2025; Moodie 2025)
                         joint (a,w) inside observed support

 Comparator              For target-trial questions: whether        From treatment-arm cross-
 availability            comparator arm exists with sufficient n    tabulation


18C.2 The contract
The contract between the Envelope and every downstream module is one-way: the
Envelope can refuse, downgrade, or annotate any request; modules cannot override
the Envelope without an explicit, logged --force-out-of-support flag. The flag is
reserved for genuine research situations where the analyst is studying the failure
mode itself; it is never the default.




                        CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 71 of 136
18D. Positivity & Overlap Diagnostics
Positivity — the requirement that every unit have non-zero probability of every
counterfactual treatment level conditional on confounders — is the assumption
most often glossed over by automated causal pipelines. CausalRoadmap runs a
layered diagnostic suite at Phase 2 and again at Phase 4 Step 5 (identifiability).

18D.1 Binary and categorical treatments
For each candidate (treatment, confounders) pair:
   •     Fit a propensity model (regularized logistic regression at v0.1; gradient-
         boosted with calibration at v0.5).
   •     Compute the distribution of estimated propensities in each arm.
   •     Flag a violation if min(p̂) < 0.05 or max(p̂) > 0.95 for more than 1% of units
         (configurable).
   •     Bootstrap the propensity model to assess instability (Petersen, Porter,
         Gruber, Wang, van der Laan 2012 framework).
   •     Run a parametric bootstrap diagnostic — refit the analysis on simulated data
         drawn from the fitted nuisance model with positivity intact; compare the
         resulting bias to the original to quantify the threat (Petersen et al. 2012).

18D.2 Continuous treatments — non-overlap ratio
The non-overlap ratio (Khatibi, Wang, Rahmani 2025; Moodie 2025) is the principled
diagnostic for continuous treatments. For each candidate intervention level a* and
the confounders W:
from __future__ import annotations
import numpy as np
from typing import Callable


def non_overlap_ratio(
    a_star: float,
    *,
    treatment: np.ndarray,
    confounders: np.ndarray,
    density_estimator: Callable[[np.ndarray, np.ndarray], np.ndarray],
    coverage: float = 0.95,
) -> float:
    """Fraction of units for whom a_star lies outside their supported A-range.


    Implements the non-overlap ratio of Khatibi, Wang, Rahmani (arXiv 2502.14566,
    2025) and the regression-based diagnostic of Moodie (Statistics in Medicine,
    2025). A value >> 0 indicates a positivity violation at a_star.


    Parameters
    ----------



                      CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 72 of 136
   a_star : the target intervention level (e.g., dose).
   treatment : observed continuous treatment, shape (n,).
   confounders : observed covariates W, shape (n, p).
   density_estimator : f(W, A) -> conditional density f(A | W) at observed pairs.
   coverage : fraction of the conditional A-mass that defines "supported".


   Returns
   -------
   float in [0, 1] — fraction of units for whom a_star is unsupported.
   """
   n = len(treatment)
   unsupported = 0
   for i in range(n):
         # build a per-unit support set {a : f(a|W_i) > tau} where tau gives `coverage`
         a_grid = np.linspace(treatment.min(), treatment.max(), 256)
         densities = density_estimator(
             np.tile(confounders[i:i+1], (256, 1)), a_grid
         )
         threshold = _coverage_threshold(densities, coverage)
         if density_estimator(confounders[i:i+1], np.array([a_star])) < threshold:
             unsupported += 1
   return unsupported / n


18D.3 Longitudinal positivity
In longitudinal settings, positivity must hold at every time point conditional on the
entire treatment-confounder history. Sequential positivity violations are subtle and
frequent; we adopt the diagnostic suite from Chatton, Schomaker, Luque-
Fernandez, Platt, Schnitzer (Epidemiology, November 2025): cumulative product of
per-time positivity, propensity-density stability across folds, and explicit reporting of
which time points carry the bulk of the risk.




                      CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 73 of 136
18E. Feasible Estimand Translation
When the analyst's target estimand lies outside the Data Support Envelope,
CausalRoadmap does not silently estimate something biased. It translates the
target to the nearest feasible estimand and reports both: the original target, the
translated target, the translation rule, and the gap. This is the architectural answer
to the user's directive that "in the case of modified treatment policies it is not do
analysis for data that isn't there."

18E.1 Translation rules by estimand class
 Original target                 If support is inadequate, translate        Method
                                 to

 ATE under deterministic A=1     ATT (restrict to treated whose             DoWhy / EconML ATT
                                 covariate support is observed)

 Continuous dose-response at     Feasible CDRC: shift unsupported units     Khatibi-Wang-Rahmani
 a*                              to nearest supported dose                  feasible CDRC (2025)

 MTP with shift d(a,w) = a + δ   Truncated MTP that caps shifts at the      lmtp shift function with
                                 observed support boundary                  truncation

 Longitudinal ATE under fixed    Cumulative cross-world weighted            McClean-Díaz (2025)
 regime                          effect                                     cumulative cross-world
                                                                            weights

 RMST contrast at horizon τ >    RMST at largest τ' where follow-up still   survRM2 with truncated
 follow-up                       has > 30% units at risk                    horizon

 CATE in subgroup X=x with       Stratified ATE with explicit small-n       EconML PolicyTree
 n_x < 50                        warning                                    subgroup, plus refusal
                                                                            flag

 NIE through mediator M with     Direct effect only, with no mediation      DoWhy direct-effect
 M post-treatment positivity     decomposition                              identification
 violation


18E.2 The translation interface
from causalrag.core.estimand import CausalEstimand, FeasibleEstimand
from causalrag.core.envelope import DataSupportEnvelope


class EstimandTranslator:
    """Translate a target estimand into the nearest feasible one.


    The translator is consulted at Phase 4 Step 5 (identifiability) and again
    at Step 6 (statistical estimand definition). Translations are logged into
    the analyst-decision ledger.
    """
    def __init__(self, envelope: DataSupportEnvelope):
          self.envelope = envelope


    def translate(self, target: CausalEstimand) -> FeasibleEstimand:




                       CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 74 of 136
       """Return a feasible estimand and the translation rationale."""
       verdict = self.envelope.check(target)
       if verdict.is_supported:
             return FeasibleEstimand(
                 original=target, translated=target,
                 gap=None, rule="no_translation_needed",
             )
       rule = self._select_rule(target, verdict)
       new_target = rule.apply(target, self.envelope)
       return FeasibleEstimand(
             original=target, translated=new_target,
             gap=verdict.gap_metrics, rule=rule.name,
             rationale=rule.human_explanation(verdict),
       )


   def _select_rule(self, target, verdict):
       # dispatch on (target.type, verdict.violation_type) pair
       ...


18E.3 Visible to the analyst
When translation occurs, the report shows three things side by side: the original
target estimand in the analyst's language, the translated estimand the package
actually computed, and a one-paragraph explanation of why translation was
necessary and what the gap implies for interpretation. The Causal Model Card flags
any translated estimand with a yellow banner. An analyst who insists on the original
target despite the warning can pass --force-out-of-support, but the report renders
that decision in red on the analyst-decision ledger.




                      CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 75 of 136
18F. The Genuineness Audit
The Genuineness Audit is a suite of six automated guards that run before any
EstimationResult is allowed into the report. Their joint purpose is to detect analyses
that look quantitative but rest on data the analyst does not have. An audit failure
either blocks the result or attaches a red flag visible in every downstream artifact.
    Guard              Detects                                          Failure action

    G1 — Phantom-      Any column referenced in the DAG or              Block; raise
    variable           estimand that is not in the Dataset Lock's       PhantomVariableError
                       schema

    G2 — Empty-cell    Any subgroup or treatment arm with n=0 or        Block; suggest stratified
                       below the analyst-set floor                      alternative

    G3 — Out-of-       Continuous intervention level outside            Block by default; translate via
    support            observed range, or MTP shift with non-           §18E if user accepts
    intervention       overlap > threshold

    G4 — Temporal      Confounder measured after treatment,             Block; route back to Step 4
    violation          mediator placed pre-treatment, follow-up         (ObservedDataSpec)
                       exceeding observed window

    G5 —               DoWhy/Ananke identify_effect returns             Block by default; allow --allow-
    Identification     NoIdentificationException                        nonidentifiable with prominent
    gap                                                                 red banner

    G6 — Imputation    Any analysis-time imputation of an outcome       Block; require explicit missing-
    creep              value                                            data plan with MNAR sensitivity


18F.1 Audit implementation
from causalrag.audit import (
       PhantomVariableError, EmptyCellError, OutOfSupportError,
       TemporalViolationError, NonIdentifiableError, ImputationCreepError,
)


class GenuinenessAudit:
       """Six-guard audit run before any EstimationResult enters the report.


       Each guard runs independently and emits an AuditFinding with severity
       'block' or 'warn'. Block-severity findings halt the pipeline.
       """
       def __init__(self, lock: DatasetLock, envelope: DataSupportEnvelope,
                      protocol: StudyProtocol):
             self.lock = lock
             self.envelope = envelope
             self.protocol = protocol


       def run(self, result: EstimationResult) -> AuditReport:
             findings: list[AuditFinding] = []
             findings.append(self._g1_phantom_variable(result))
             findings.append(self._g2_empty_cell(result))



                          CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 76 of 136
       findings.append(self._g3_out_of_support(result))
       findings.append(self._g4_temporal_violation(result))
       findings.append(self._g5_identification_gap(result))
       findings.append(self._g6_imputation_creep(result))
       blocked = [f for f in findings if f.severity == "block"
                  and not f.user_overrode]
       if blocked:
           raise AuditBlockingError(blocked)
       return AuditReport(findings=findings, lock_fingerprint=self.lock.fingerprint)


   def _g1_phantom_variable(self, result):
       # set difference of result.referenced_columns vs lock.column_dtypes
       phantoms = set(result.referenced_columns()) - set(self.lock.column_dtypes)
       if phantoms:
           return AuditFinding(
               guard="G1", severity="block",
               message=f"Result references {phantoms} not in dataset.",
           )
       return AuditFinding(guard="G1", severity="pass")


18F.2 Where the audit lives in the pipeline
The Genuineness Audit runs three times in every project:
   74.After Phase 1 Discovery — checking that the proposed DAG, candidate roles,
      and feasibility report reference only columns in the Lock.
   75.After Phase 3 Hypothesis generation — checking each hypothesis before it
      enters Phase 4.
   76.After every Step 7 EstimationResult — the final, mandatory gate before the
      report sees the result.

18F.3 The audit log
Every audit run, pass or fail, writes an entry to .causalrag/audit.jsonl. The log is
append-only (the writer holds an OS lock during write) and is rendered verbatim into
the report's provenance section. An empty log is itself a red flag — it means audits
were bypassed.




                      CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 77 of 136
19. Comprehensive Method Catalog
This section enumerates every causal-inference method exposed by
CausalRoadmap, organized by category and annotated with backend, supported
estimand classes, and required data flags. The catalog is the source of truth for the
registry; entries here correspond 1-to-1 with entry points in causalrag.estimators.

19.1 Identification & DAG-level
 Method                                   Backend             Estimands              Notes

 Back-door / front-door / IV              Py (DoWhy)          All                    Run automatically in Step 5
 identification

 ID algorithm (Shpitser-Pearl)            Py (Ananke)         All                    ADMGs with latent confounders

 gID algorithm (Bhattacharya-Nabi-        Py (Ananke)         All                    Generalized identification
 Shpitser)

 pywhy-graphs DAG/CPDAG/PAG               Py                  —                      Markov-equivalence class
                                                                                     manipulation

 Bayesian-network do() inference          Py (pyAgrum,        Decision-analytic      Discrete networks
                                          pgmpy)


19.2 ATE / ATT point estimation
 Method                                 Backend                     Required flags             Notes

 IPW / IPTW                             Py (DoWhy)                  BINARY/                    Stabilized weights
                                                                    CAT_TREATMENT              default

 AIPW / Doubly Robust                   Py (DoWhy, EconML)          BINARY/                    Default DR baseline
                                                                    CAT_TREATMENT

 LinearDML                              Py (EconML)                 Any treatment + many       Original CausalRAG
                                                                    controls                   estimator

 DoubleML (PartialLinearIRM)            Py (DoubleML)               Same as DML                Cluster-robust SEs
                                                                                               available

 TMLE3 (tmle3, drtmle)                  R (tlverse)                 BINARY_TREATMENT           Efficient SE;
                                                                                               preferred in epi

 g-computation / parametric g-          Py custom; R                LONGITUDINAL               Time-varying
 formula                                (gfoRmula)                                             confounding

 Propensity matching                    R (MatchIt)                 BINARY_TREATMENT           Explainability-critical
 (NN/optimal/full/CEM/genetic/cardin                                                           settings
 ality)

 Synthetic Control / Synth / GSC        Py (pysyncon,               SINGLE_TREATED_UNIT        Comparative case
                                        sparsesc); R (Synth,        + PANEL                    studies
                                        gsynth)

 CausalImpact (BSTS)                    Py (tfcausalimpact);        Time series with           Marketing lift; policy
                                        R (CausalImpact)            intervention point         shocks

 Marginal effects (delta-method)        R (marginaleffects)         Any model                  Reporting after




                         CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 78 of 136
Method                                  Backend                    Required flags               Notes

                                                                                                regression

DiD (canonical, staggered)              Py (differences); R        PANEL_STRUCTURE +            Callaway–Sant'Anna
                                        (did, fect)                binary treatment over        for staggered
                                                                   time


19.3 CATE / heterogeneous treatment effects
Method                                  Backend                         Required flags            Notes

Causal Forest / GRF                     Py (EconML.grf); R (grf)        BINARY_TREATMENT          Default HTE
                                                                                                  workhorse

S-/T-/X-learner (Künzel)                Py (EconML, CausalML)           BINARY_TREATMENT          Sklearn meta-
                                                                                                  learners

R-Learner (Nie-Wager)                   Py (EconML)                     BINARY_TREATMENT          Robinson
                                                                                                  decomposition for
                                                                                                  CATE

DR-Learner (Kennedy)                    Py (EconML, DoubleML)           BINARY_TREATMENT          Strong DR with
                                                                                                  sklearn

BART / BCF (Hahn-Murray-Carvalho)       R (bartCause, bcf); Py          BINARY_TREATMENT          Bayesian; posterior
                                        (pymc-bart)                                               CIs

SparseLinearDML / ForestDML /           Py (EconML)                     HIGH_DIMENSIONAL          Many features
KernelDML

Policy learning (PolicyForest,          Py (EconML); R (policytree)     BINARY_TREATMENT          Decision support
policytree)


19.4 Survival-specific (ACIC 2026 emphasis)
Method                                  Backend               Notes

Causal Survival Forest (Cui et al.      R (grf)               Canonical CATE for right-censored outcomes; targets
2023, JRSS-B)                                                 RMST or survival probability; doubly robust w.r.t.
                                                              censoring

RMST contrast (Royston-Parmar)          R (survRM2)           Marginal RMST difference up to horizon τ

IPCW-adjusted DML                       Py wrapper + R        Time-to-event DML
                                        nuisance

TMLE for survival (survtmle, MOSS)      R                     Doubly robust survival ATE at fixed t

Causal Cox (riskRegression,             R                     Hazard ratios with confounding adjustment
cmprsk)

Pseudo-observation methods              R (pseudo)            Marginal RMST / CIF regression

Survival meta-learners                  Py custom + R         T/S/X with survival base models

Fine-Gray competing risks               R (cmprsk)            When COMPETING_RISKS flag set




                         CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 79 of 136
19.5 IV methods
Method                                 Backend                              When

2SLS / GMM                             Py (linearmodels, statsmodels)       Linear IV

DeepIV / OrthoIV / IV-Forest           Py (EconML)                          Nonparametric IV with ML nuisance

Wald estimator                         Py                                   Binary IV, binary treatment

Mendelian randomization                R (MendelianRandomization,           Genetic IV in epidemiology
                                       TwoSampleMR)

MR-PRESSO                              R                                    Pleiotropy-robust MR

IV sensitivity (iv.sensemakr)          R                                    OVB for IV


19.6 Mediation
Method                                 Backend                           Notes

Imai-Keele NDE/NIE                     R (mediation); Py                 Sequential ignorability
                                       (pymediation)

CMAverse                               R                                 Exposure-mediator interaction; multiple
                                                                         mediators

Natural / interventional effects via   Py (DoWhy.gcm)                    Mechanism analysis
SCM

Causal mediation with TMLE             R (tmle3mediate)                  Doubly robust mediation


19.7 Beyond the ATE — stochastic interventions / MTPs
Method                                 Backend             Notes

lmtp (Díaz-Williams)                   R                   Binary, categorical, continuous, mixture exposures;
                                                           point or longitudinal; competing risks

txshift                                R                   Continuous-exposure additive shifts

tmle3shift                             R (tlverse)         Stochastic-shift interventions via TMLE3

Quantile g-computation                 Py / R (qgcomp)     Mixture exposures

Counterfactual quantile /              Py                  Distributional impact
distributional effects                 (DoWhy.gcm);
                                       R (DRDID)


19.8 Sensitivity analysis
Method                                 Backend                           What it bounds

E-value                                Py (custom); R (EValue)           Minimum confounder strength to nullify

sensemakr (OLS)                        Py (PySensemakr); R               Partial-R² OVB; robustness value
                                       (sensemakr)

dml.sensemakr                          R                                 Partial-R² OVB for DML score

iv.sensemakr                           R                                 OVB for IV




                        CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 80 of 136
Method                                Backend                           What it bounds

Rosenbaum bounds                      R (rbounds, sensitivitymw,        Bias in matched studies (Γ)
                                      sensitivitymv)

Manski bounds                         Py (custom)                       Worst-case partial identification

Bayesian bias priors                  Py (PyMC custom)                  Posterior under skeptical priors

Negative-control outcome (NCO)        R (tipr)                          Confounding via known-null association

Specification curve / multiverse      Py custom + DoWhy refute          Distribution over modeling choices


19.9 Causal discovery
Method                                Backend                  Notes

PC, PC-stable                         Py (causal-learn)        Constraint-based

FCI / RFCI                            Py (causal-learn)        Latent-aware (PAG output)

GES, GIES, GRaSP                      Py (causal-learn)        Score-based

NOTEARS / NOTEARS-MLP / DAGMA         Py (causal-learn,        Continuous-optimization
                                      dagma)

LiNGAM family (ICA, Direct, VAR,      Py (lingam)              Non-Gaussian linear
RCD)

PCMCI+, LPCMCI                        Py (Tigramite)           Time-series causal discovery

LLM-prior-augmented PC / GES          Py (this package)        LLM edge priors + statistical discovery
(Jiralerspong-DFS, Vashishtha)

bnlearn structure learners            R (bnlearn)              Bayesian network structure


19.10 Multiple testing and aggregation
Method                                Backend                        Notes

Benjamini-Hochberg (BH)               Py (statsmodels)               Default FDR control

Benjamini-Yekutieli (BY)              Py (statsmodels)               Under positive regression dependence

Bonferroni / Holm                     Py                             FWER control

Knockoffs                             Py (knockpy); R (knockoff)     FDR with variable-selection guarantees

Permutation / bootstrap               Py                             Universal fallback




                       CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 81 of 136
20. Method Ensembles & Triangulation
CausalRoadmap treats multi-method execution as the default analysis style in the
academic and domain-expert tiers. Three forms of ensemble run:

20.1 Within-estimand ensemble
For a single causal estimand and a single DAG, run K (default 3) estimators chosen
by the registry. Report:
   •   Each estimator's point estimate and CI.
   •   A fixed-effects inverse-variance meta-analytic combined point estimate and
       CI.
   •   Cochran Q heterogeneity statistic and I² indicating disagreement.
   •   Sign-consistency flag: do all K CIs share the same sign on zero?

20.2 Cross-DAG multiverse
For a single estimand and a single estimator, run across K candidate DAGs from
Phase 1. Render as a specification-curve plot (Simonsohn et al.) with point
estimates on the y-axis and DAG identifiers on the x-axis, accompanied by an
annotation column showing which edges differ between DAGs.

20.3 Tripartite triangulation
The Lawlor et al. (2016, IJE) tripartite recipe — one DR/DML estimator, one
matching-based estimator, one TMLE — runs as a special-purpose ensemble for the
high-stakes findings. Triangulation outcomes:
   •   Consonant (all three CIs overlap with consistent sign): high robustness.
   •   Two-of-three consonant: moderate robustness; the outlier is investigated.
   •   Dissonant: low robustness; the report flags this prominently and recommends
       additional sensitivity work.

20.4 Aggregator output
A MultiverseResult object holds the full ensemble output and is what the reporter
consumes. It contains every individual EstimationResult, the meta-analytic
aggregates, the consonance verdict, and a serializable representation suitable for
re-loading and re-analysis.




                    CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 82 of 136
20A. Code-Out Method Catalog — Overview
Section 20A through 20K extend the method catalog of §19 with full code-out
signatures, real package names, PhD-level method variants, and explicit guidance
on when each method is appropriate vs. inappropriate. Where two competing
modern methods disagree (e.g., causal forest vs. modified causal forest), both are
exposed and the package runs them in parallel by default in the academic tier.
Every method in this section ships as a CausalEstimator-protocol-compliant adapter
under causalrag.estimators. The code blocks below are normative — they show the
actual signature the v0.5 release will expose. Internal implementation details (cross-
fitting, bootstrap, R session management) are factored into shared utilities
documented in §17.
Methods are organized into eleven categories aligned with §19, with each category
expanded into PhD-level depth: §20B point-treatment ATE/ATT; §20C heterogeneous
effects (CATE); §20D continuous treatment / dose-response; §20E modified
treatment policies; §20F survival; §20G mediation; §20H instrumental variables; §20I
causal discovery; §20J sensitivity analysis; §20K conformal & honest inference.




                    CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 83 of 136
20B. Point-Treatment ATE / ATT — Full Method Family
For binary treatment and any outcome type, the package exposes the full DR +
TMLE + matching family. The default in the data-scientist tier is AIPW. The academic
tier runs an ensemble — AIPW, LinearDML, TMLE, MatchIt — and reports a
triangulated estimate.

20B.1 AIPW (Doubly Robust)
from __future__ import annotations
import numpy as np, pandas as pd
from typing import Sequence
from sklearn.base import BaseEstimator
from causalrag.core.result import EstimationResult
from causalrag.core.flags import DataFlag


def aipw_ate(
    data: pd.DataFrame, *,
    treatment: str, outcome: str, confounders: Sequence[str],
    outcome_model: BaseEstimator,            # e.g., HistGradientBoostingRegressor
    propensity_model: BaseEstimator,         # e.g., LogisticRegressionCV
    cv: int = 5, trim: tuple[float, float] = (0.02, 0.98),
    random_state: int = 17,
) -> EstimationResult:
    """Augmented IPW for ATE under binary treatment (Robins-Rotnitzky-Zhao 1994).


    Doubly robust: consistent if either outcome or propensity model is correct.
    Cross-fitted nuisance estimation per Chernozhukov et al. 2018, Algorithm 3.
    Trims propensity scores at `trim` to defend against positivity violations.
    """
    from sklearn.model_selection import KFold
    n = len(data)
    W = data[list(confounders)].values; A = data[treatment].values; Y =
data[outcome].values
    psi = np.empty(n); mu0 = np.empty(n); mu1 = np.empty(n); g = np.empty(n)
    kf = KFold(n_splits=cv, shuffle=True, random_state=random_state)
    for train_idx, test_idx in kf.split(W):
          om = clone(outcome_model).fit(np.column_stack([W[train_idx], A[train_idx]]),
Y[train_idx])
          pm = clone(propensity_model).fit(W[train_idx], A[train_idx])
          mu0[test_idx] = om.predict(np.column_stack([W[test_idx], np.zeros(len(test_idx))]))
          mu1[test_idx] = om.predict(np.column_stack([W[test_idx], np.ones(len(test_idx))]))
          g[test_idx] = np.clip(pm.predict_proba(W[test_idx])[:, 1], *trim)
    psi = (mu1 - mu0) + A * (Y - mu1) / g - (1 - A) * (Y - mu0) / (1 - g)
    return EstimationResult.from_influence_curve(psi, estimand="ATE",
                                                       diagnostics={"min_g": g.min(), "max_g":
g.max()})




                       CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 84 of 136
20B.2 TMLE (Targeted Minimum Loss Estimation) — preferred for
efficient inference
TMLE is the standard van der Laan estimator. The Python ecosystem now has zEpid
for cross-sectional TMLE; the canonical implementation remains tlverse/tmle3 in R,
exposed here via rpy2.
def tmle_ate(
    data: pd.DataFrame, *,
    treatment: str, outcome: str, confounders: Sequence[str],
    backend: Literal["python", "r"] = "r",
    super_learner_library: list[str] = ("SL.glmnet", "SL.ranger", "SL.xgboost"),
) -> EstimationResult:
    """Targeted Minimum Loss Estimator for the ATE (van der Laan & Rubin 2006).


    Doubly robust + efficient + targeted: corrects bias in the initial outcome
    estimate using a one-step parametric update along the score of the propensity.
    The R backend (tlverse/tmle3 + sl3) is the reference implementation.
    """
    if backend == "r":
          from causalrag.estimators.rbridge._r import require_r_package
          tmle3 = require_r_package("tmle3")
          sl3 = require_r_package("sl3")
          # ... build sl3 learner stacks; call tmle3::tmle3_Spec_ATE() ...
          # ... extract psi, std error, influence curve ...
          return EstimationResult(...)
    else:
          from zepid.causal.doublyrobust import TMLE             # python fallback
          m = TMLE(data, exposure=treatment, outcome=outcome)
          m.exposure_model(" + ".join(confounders))
          m.outcome_model(" + ".join(confounders))
          m.fit()
          return EstimationResult(point=m.average_treatment_effect,
                                   ci=(m.average_treatment_effect_ci),
                                   se=m.average_treatment_effect_se, estimand="ATE")


20B.3 LinearDML (debiased ML) — the CausalRAG original
def linear_dml_ate(
    data: pd.DataFrame, *,
    treatment: str, outcome: str, confounders: Sequence[str],
    effect_modifiers: Sequence[str] = (),
    discrete_treatment: bool = True,
    cv: int = 5,
) -> EstimationResult:
    """LinearDML (Chernozhukov et al. 2018) via EconML.


    Two-stage cross-fitted estimator: stage 1 fits E[Y|W] and E[A|W] with
    arbitrary ML; stage 2 regresses residuals with a linear final model.




                       CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 85 of 136
    Inference from the influence function; this is the estimator used in
    the CausalRAG poster.
    """
    from econml.dml import LinearDML
    from sklearn.ensemble import GradientBoostingRegressor, GradientBoostingClassifier
    W = data[list(confounders)].values; X = data[list(effect_modifiers)].values if
effect_modifiers else None
    A = data[treatment].values; Y = data[outcome].values
    est = LinearDML(
          model_y=GradientBoostingRegressor(n_estimators=100, max_depth=4),
          model_t=GradientBoostingClassifier(n_estimators=100, max_depth=4) if
discrete_treatment else GradientBoostingRegressor(),
          discrete_treatment=discrete_treatment, cv=cv, random_state=17,
    )
    est.fit(Y=Y, T=A, X=X, W=W)
    point = float(est.ate(X=X))
    lo, hi = est.ate_interval(X=X, alpha=0.05)
    return EstimationResult(point=point, ci=(float(lo), float(hi)),
                              estimand="ATE", backend="econml.LinearDML")


20B.4 PhD-grade comparison rules
When two of the above estimators disagree by more than 25% of their pooled CI
width, the package emits a triangulation warning and reports both. In the academic
tier, all four (AIPW, TMLE, LinearDML, MatchIt) run by default and the report
contains a tripartite-style table (Lawlor et al. 2016).




                       CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 86 of 136
20C. Heterogeneous Treatment Effects (CATE) — Full
Method Family
For CATE the package exposes four families: meta-learners, causal forests (multiple
variants), DR-learner, and BART-based Bayesian Causal Forests. The PhD-grade
addition is the Modified Causal Forest (Lechner) and Bayesian Causal Forest for
longitudinal data (BCFLong, 2025).

20C.1 Causal Forest (grf) — the canonical baseline
def causal_forest_cate(
    data: pd.DataFrame, *,
    treatment: str, outcome: str, confounders: Sequence[str],
    n_trees: int = 4000, honest: bool = True,
    tune_parameters: Literal["none","all"] = "all",
) -> EstimationResult:
    """Generalized Random Forests CATE (Athey, Tibshirani, Wager 2019).


    Uses the canonical grf R package via rpy2 — Python EconML port is a
    reimplementation, not a wrapper, and diverges in places. The R version
    is the reference; we expose both and warn if they disagree.
    """
    from causalrag.estimators.rbridge._r import require_r_package
    grf = require_r_package("grf")
    # ... pandas -> R data.frame via pandas2ri ...
    # ... cf <- grf::causal_forest(W, Y, A, num.trees=n_trees, honesty=honest) ...
    # ... predict and extract influence curves ...
    return EstimationResult(...)


20C.2 Modified Causal Forest (mcf) — Lechner's efficiency
improvement
def modified_causal_forest_cate(
    data: pd.DataFrame, *,
    treatment: str, outcome: str, confounders: Sequence[str],
    effect_modifiers: Sequence[str] = (),
) -> EstimationResult:
    """Modified Causal Forest (Lechner 2019; Bodory, Busshoff, Lechner 2022).


    Adapts the splitting criterion to account for covariance of estimation
    errors and selection bias. Python implementation: `mcf` package on PyPI.
    Provides inference at all aggregation levels (ATE, GATE, IATE, BGATE).
    Recommended over causal_forest when treatment selection is strong.
    """
    from mcf import ModifiedCausalForest        # pip install mcf
    mcf = ModifiedCausalForest(
          var_y_name=outcome, var_d_name=treatment,




                       CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 87 of 136
          var_x_name_ord=list(confounders),
          var_z_name_list=list(effect_modifiers),
    )
    mcf.train(data)
    results, _, _ = mcf.predict(data)
    return EstimationResult.from_mcf_results(results, estimand="CATE")


20C.3 R-Learner (Nie-Wager)
def r_learner_cate(
    data: pd.DataFrame, *,
    treatment: str, outcome: str, confounders: Sequence[str],
    effect_modifiers: Sequence[str],
    final_stage: Literal["forest","linear","xgb"] = "forest",
) -> EstimationResult:
    """R-Learner (Nie & Wager 2021, Biometrika): quasi-oracle CATE via
    Robinson decomposition + arbitrary final-stage learner.
    """
    from econml.dml import NonParamDML
    # ... fit per Robinson; final stage chosen by `final_stage` ...
    return EstimationResult(...)


20C.4 Bayesian Causal Forest (BCF) — Hahn, Murray, Carvalho
def bayesian_causal_forest_cate(
    data: pd.DataFrame, *,
    treatment: str, outcome: str, confounders: Sequence[str],
    n_samples: int = 4000, n_burn: int = 2000,
) -> EstimationResult:
    """Bayesian Causal Forest (Hahn, Murray, Carvalho 2020, Bayesian Analysis).


    Decomposes outcome into prognostic and treatment-effect surfaces, each
    modeled with BART. Provides full posterior credible intervals — useful
    when uncertainty quantification matters (small n, high stakes).
    R implementation: bcf package. Python: stochtree.
    """
    import stochtree                                 # pip install stochtree
    bcf = stochtree.BCFModel()
    bcf.sample(X=W, Z=A, y=Y, num_gfr=10, num_burnin=n_burn, num_mcmc=n_samples)
    return EstimationResult.from_posterior(bcf.tau_hat_train, estimand="CATE")


20C.5 BCFLong — Bayesian Causal Forest for longitudinal data (2025)
BCFLong (Caron, Mealli, Pacciaroni, Papaspiliopoulos 2025) extends BCF with
hierarchical random effects per subject — random intercept + time-dependent slope
with a horseshoe sparsity prior. The motivating dataset is NO.MS, the largest
multiple sclerosis clinical trial database (35,000 patients, 15-year follow-up). For
longitudinal observational data with repeated outcome measurements, this is the
current PhD-grade Bayesian baseline.



                       CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 88 of 136
def bcf_long_cate(
    data: pd.DataFrame, *,
    treatment: str, outcome: str, confounders: Sequence[str],
    subject_id: str, time: str,
    n_samples: int = 4000,
) -> EstimationResult:
    """BCFLong (Caron et al. 2025, arXiv:2508.08418).


    Hierarchical BCF with random intercept + time-dependent slope per
    subject and horseshoe sparsity prior. Designed for longitudinal data
    with within-individual correlation. Reference implementation in R.
    """
    from causalrag.estimators.rbridge._r import require_r_package
    bcflong = require_r_package("BCFLong")      # or fork until on CRAN
    # ... R-side fit + extract per-subject tau trajectories ...
    return EstimationResult(...)


20C.6 RATE — Rank-weighted ATE (Yadlowsky et al. 2025)
def rank_weighted_ate(
    cate_estimator: Callable, *,
    data: pd.DataFrame,
    weight_scheme: Literal["AUTOC","QINI"] = "AUTOC",
) -> EstimationResult:
    """Rank-Weighted Average Treatment Effect (Yadlowsky, Fleming, Shah,
    Brunskill, Wager 2025, JASA).


    Evaluates a CATE-based treatment prioritization rule by computing the
    expected gain of treating the top-q% (by predicted CATE). Doubly robust.
    Reference implementation: grf::rank_average_treatment_effect.
    """
    # ... fit cate_estimator on splits, evaluate prioritization, return AUTOC/QINI ...




                     CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 89 of 136
20D. Continuous Treatment & Dose-Response
Continuous treatment is where naive ATE collapses and where the package's data-
locking discipline is most consequential. The Data Support Envelope is enforced
rigorously: dose-response is reported only at values where the conditional density
f(A|W) has adequate mass; values outside support are translated via the feasible
CDRC of §18E or flagged with a hard banner.

20D.1 Generalized propensity score + outcome regression
def gps_dose_response(
    data: pd.DataFrame, *,
    treatment: str, outcome: str, confounders: Sequence[str],
    a_grid: np.ndarray,
    propensity_model: Literal["gaussian","gamma","density"] = "density",
) -> EstimationResult:
    """Hirano-Imbens generalized propensity score for continuous treatment.


    Parametric baseline; superseded by Colangelo-Lee 2025 DML (§20D.3) for
    PhD-level work. Retained for low-n settings and comparison.
    """
    # ... fit f(A|W); compute GPS at observed (A,W); regress Y on (A, GPS) ...
    return EstimationResult(...)


20D.2 Causal Dose-Response via HAL plug-in (van der Laan, Shi-
Phillips 2024)
Highly Adaptive Lasso has the unique theoretical property of providing valid
statistical inference for the causal dose-response curve — a non-pathwise-
differentiable parameter where standard √n estimators do not exist. This is the PhD-
grade option.
def hal_dose_response(
    data: pd.DataFrame, *,
    treatment: str, outcome: str, confounders: Sequence[str],
    a_grid: np.ndarray,
) -> EstimationResult:
    """HAL-based plug-in CDRC estimator (Shi, Phillips, van der Laan 2024).


    Highly Adaptive Lasso is empirically Donsker and achieves o(n^{-1/4})
    convergence; van der Laan 2023 establishes pointwise asymptotic normality
    of the HAL plug-in for the marginal dose-response curve.


    Reference R implementation: hal9001 + augmented HAL plug-in (SeraphinaShi
    GitHub: HAL-in-R). No production Python port yet.
    """
    from causalrag.estimators.rbridge._r import require_r_package
    hal9001 = require_r_package("hal9001")




                     CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 90 of 136
    # ... fit HAL on (Y, A, W); construct undersmoothed plug-in at each a in a_grid ...
    return EstimationResult.dose_response(curve=..., ci=..., method="HAL")


20D.3 Colangelo-Lee 2025 nonparametric continuous DML
def colangelo_lee_dml(
    data: pd.DataFrame, *,
    treatment: str, outcome: str, confounders: Sequence[str],
    a_target: float, bandwidth: float | None = None,
) -> EstimationResult:
    """Double Debiased ML for continuous treatment dose-response.


    Colangelo & Lee (JBES 2025). Kernel-localized DML for the average
    structural function E[Y(a*)]; provides asymptotic normality at
    nonparametric rate. Bandwidth via plug-in optimal h.
    """
    # ... kernel-localize at a_target; fit nuisance via SuperLearner or GBM ...
    # ... compute doubly robust moment; return point + CI ...
    return EstimationResult(...)


20D.4 Feasible CDRC under positivity violations (Khatibi-Wang-
Rahmani 2025)
def feasible_cdrc(
    data: pd.DataFrame, *,
    treatment: str, outcome: str, confounders: Sequence[str],
    a_grid: np.ndarray, coverage: float = 0.95,
) -> EstimationResult:
    """Feasible dose-response curve (arXiv:2502.14566, 2025).


    For each (unit, a*) pair, if a* is outside the unit's support, map to
    the nearest supported value. Estimand becomes the response to an
    individualized-most-feasible intervention. Returned alongside the
    non-overlap ratio so the analyst sees the gap.
    """
    from causalrag.envelope import non_overlap_ratio
    # ... for each a* in a_grid, compute non_overlap_ratio(a*, ...) ...
    # ... reassign unsupported units to nearest supported a; plug-in g-formula ...
    return EstimationResult.dose_response(curve=..., ci=..., method="feasible_CDRC",
                                            non_overlap=non_overlap_curve)




                     CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 91 of 136
20E. Modified Treatment Policies & Stochastic
Interventions
MTPs (Haneuse-Rotnitzky 2013) and LMTPs (Díaz, Williams, Hoffman, Schenck 2021,
JASA) are the principled framework for continuous, multivalued, and mixture
exposures. They are also the methodological centerpiece of the package's data-
locking architecture: MTPs are designed so that the intervention shift d(a, w) keeps
the joint (a, w) inside the observed support, satisfying positivity by construction.

20E.1 LMTP — the canonical implementation
def lmtp_effect(
    data: pd.DataFrame, *,
    treatment: str | list[str],               # supports time-varying
    outcome: str,
    confounders: list[str] | list[list[str]],       # baseline or per-time
    censoring: str | None = None,
    competing_event: str | None = None,
    shift_function: Callable[[np.ndarray, np.ndarray], np.ndarray] = None,
    estimator: Literal["tmle", "sdr", "sub", "ipw"] = "tmle",
    super_learner_library: list[str] = ("SL.glmnet", "SL.ranger", "SL.xgboost"),
    folds: int = 10,
) -> EstimationResult:
    """Longitudinal Modified Treatment Policy (Díaz et al. 2021 JASA).


    The most general estimator in the package: binary / continuous / mixture
    exposures; point or longitudinal; survival, binary, or continuous outcomes;
    competing risks and informative censoring. R backend: lmtp.


    The `shift_function` MUST be designed against the Data Support Envelope.
    The package rejects shift functions that move units out of observed support
    (per §18E feasible estimand translation). Default truncation: shifts are
    capped at the 95% conditional support boundary.
    """
    from causalrag.estimators.rbridge._r import require_r_package
    from causalrag.envelope import validate_shift_function
    validate_shift_function(shift_function, data, treatment, confounders)         # raises if OOS
    lmtp = require_r_package("lmtp")
    SuperLearner = require_r_package("SuperLearner")
    # ... build R-side shift, learners, call lmtp::lmtp_tmle (or _sdr/_sub/_ipw) ...
    # ... extract psi, std error, EIF; build EstimationResult ...
    return EstimationResult(...)


20E.2 Cumulative cross-world weighted effects (McClean-Díaz 2025)
def cumulative_cross_world_effect(
    data: pd.DataFrame, *,
    regime_a: Callable, regime_b: Callable,



                       CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 92 of 136
    treatment: list[str], outcome: str,
    confounders: list[list[str]],
) -> EstimationResult:
    """Cumulative cross-world weighted effect (McClean & Díaz 2025).


    Identifies a contrast between two longitudinal regimes WITHOUT requiring
    full positivity at every time point. Achieves doubly-robust √n inference.
    Use when comparing two non-implementable regimes (e.g., always-on vs.
    always-off) and positivity fails in one or both.
    """
    # ... estimate cross-world propensity, run DR-style update ...
    return EstimationResult(...)




                     CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 93 of 136
20F. Survival & Time-to-Event
Survival is treated as a first-class flag (RIGHT_CENSORED_OUTCOME). The default
estimator is the Causal Survival Forest (Cui, Kosorok, Sverdrup, Wager, Zhu 2023
JRSS-B); secondary options include RMST contrast and longitudinal TMLE for
survival.

20F.1 Causal Survival Forest (Cui et al. 2023)
def causal_survival_forest(
    data: pd.DataFrame, *,
    treatment: str, time: str, event: str, confounders: Sequence[str],
    horizon: float | None = None,
    target: Literal["RMST","survival_probability"] = "RMST",
    n_trees: int = 4000,
) -> EstimationResult:
    """Causal Survival Forest (Cui et al. 2023 JRSS-B).


    Doubly robust w.r.t. censoring. Reference: grf::causal_survival_forest.
    Targets RMST(τ) or survival probability at τ. Horizon truncated to
    largest τ where adequate at-risk population remains (Data Support
    Envelope §18C).
    """
    from causalrag.estimators.rbridge._r import require_r_package
    grf = require_r_package("grf")
    if horizon is None:
          horizon = float(np.quantile(data.loc[data[event] == 1, time], 0.95))
    # ... call grf::causal_survival_forest, get average_treatment_effect ...
    return EstimationResult(...)


20F.2 RMST contrast
def rmst_contrast(
    data: pd.DataFrame, *,
    treatment: str, time: str, event: str,
    horizon: float, adjust: Sequence[str] | None = None,
) -> EstimationResult:
    """Marginal RMST contrast up to horizon τ (Royston-Parmar).


    R backend: survRM2 (unadjusted) or adjusted via IPCW-weighted Kaplan-Meier.
    """
    from causalrag.estimators.rbridge._r import require_r_package
    survRM2 = require_r_package("survRM2")
    # ... call survRM2::rmst2() ...
    return EstimationResult(...)


20F.3 Longitudinal TMLE for survival (LTMLE)
def ltmle_survival(




                       CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 94 of 136
    data: pd.DataFrame, *,
    treatment_vars: list[str], outcome_var: str, censoring_vars: list[str],
    confounder_vars_by_time: list[list[str]],
    regime: list[Any],
    super_learner_library: list[str] = ("SL.glmnet", "SL.ranger"),
) -> EstimationResult:
    """Longitudinal Targeted Minimum Loss Estimation for survival.


    R backend: ltmle package + sl3. Handles time-varying confounding,
    informative censoring, and arbitrary regime contrasts. Standard tool
    for adaptive treatment strategies (Zhang et al. 2025, Int J Tech Asses).
    """
    from causalrag.estimators.rbridge._r import require_r_package
    ltmle = require_r_package("ltmle")
    # ... build long-form data.frame; call ltmle::ltmle ...
    return EstimationResult(...)




                     CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 95 of 136
20G. Mediation Analysis
20G.1 Imai-Keele-Tingley NDE / NIE
def imai_keele_mediation(
    data: pd.DataFrame, *,
    treatment: str, mediator: str, outcome: str, confounders: Sequence[str],
    boot: int = 1000,
) -> EstimationResult:
    """NDE and NIE under sequential ignorability (Imai et al. 2010 Psych Methods).


    R backend: mediation package. Sensitivity analysis via medsens.
    """
    from causalrag.estimators.rbridge._r import require_r_package
    mediation = require_r_package("mediation")
    # ... fit outcome model + mediator model; mediation::mediate; medsens ...
    return EstimationResult(...)


20G.2 TMLE for natural (in)direct effects — tmle3mediate
def tmle3_mediation(
    data: pd.DataFrame, *,
    treatment: str, mediator: str, outcome: str, confounders: Sequence[str],
    estimand: Literal["NDE","NIE","PIE","TE"] = "NDE",
) -> EstimationResult:
    """TMLE-based mediation (Hejazi, Coyle, van der Laan 2022).


    R backend: tlverse/tmle3mediate. Doubly robust; valid inference with
    super learner nuisance estimation.
    """
    from causalrag.estimators.rbridge._r import require_r_package
    tmle3mediate = require_r_package("tmle3mediate")
    # ... build spec; run tmle3 with mediation spec ...
    return EstimationResult(...)


20G.3 Longitudinal mediation with HAL-EIC (Ye & van der Laan 2023)
For longitudinal mediation with time-varying confounders, competing risks, and
informative censoring, Ye & van der Laan's HAL-EIC one-step TMLE (arXiv
2304.04904) is the PhD-grade method. Doubly robust, locally efficient, and provides
asymptotic normality under realistic conditions. Reference implementation in R;
exposed via rpy2.




                        CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 96 of 136
20H. Instrumental Variables
20H.1 2SLS
def two_stage_least_squares(
    data: pd.DataFrame, *,
    instrument: str, treatment: str, outcome: str, covariates: Sequence[str] = (),
) -> EstimationResult:
    """Classic linear IV via 2SLS. linearmodels.IV2SLS reference."""
    from linearmodels import IV2SLS
    # ... call IV2SLS.from_formula ...
    return EstimationResult(...)


20H.2 DeepIV / OrthoIV / IV-Forest
def deep_iv(
    data: pd.DataFrame, *,
    instrument: str, treatment: str, outcome: str, covariates: Sequence[str],
) -> EstimationResult:
    """Hartford-Lewis-Leyton-Brown-Taddy 2017 DeepIV via EconML."""
    from econml.iv.nnet import DeepIVEstimator
    # ... build treatment NN, response NN; fit ...
    return EstimationResult(...)


20H.3 MR-PRESSO for Mendelian randomization
For genetic IV (Mendelian randomization), the package bridges MR-PRESSO
(Verbanck, Chen, Neale, Do 2018) via rpy2. Detects and removes horizontal
pleiotropy outliers; produces both raw and corrected estimates. Used in
epidemiology and increasingly in clinical research.




                     CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 97 of 136
20I. Causal Discovery — Constraint, Score, Hybrid
The package exposes the full causal-learn suite plus PhD-grade additions: NOTEARS,
DAGMA, DECI (variational), DAGPA (NeurIPS 2025 differentiable constraint-based).

20I.1 PC and FCI
def pc_discovery(
    data: pd.DataFrame, *,
    alpha: float = 0.05,
    independence_test: Literal["fisherz","chisq","gsq","kci"] = "fisherz",
) -> CausalGraph:
    """PC algorithm via causal-learn (Spirtes-Glymour 1991)."""
    from causallearn.search.ConstraintBased.PC import pc
    cg = pc(data.values, alpha=alpha, indep_test=independence_test)
    return CausalGraph.from_cpdag(cg.G, names=list(data.columns))


20I.2 NOTEARS / DAGMA / DAGPA — continuous optimization
def dagma_discovery(data: pd.DataFrame, *, lambda1: float = 0.05) -> CausalGraph:
    """DAGMA (Bello, Aragam, Ravikumar 2022 NeurIPS) via dagma package."""
    from dagma.linear import DagmaLinear                  # pip install dagma
    model = DagmaLinear(loss_type="l2")
    W_est = model.fit(data.values, lambda1=lambda1)
    return CausalGraph.from_weight_matrix(W_est, names=list(data.columns))


def dagpa_discovery(data: pd.DataFrame, *, top_k: int = 5) -> list[CausalGraph]:
    """DAGPA (Zhou-Wang NeurIPS 2025) — differentiable constraint-based.


    Reference: PurdueMINDS/DAGPA. Hybrid that combines NOTEARS-style
    optimization with conditional-independence agreement scoring.
    Returns the top-k DAGs ranked by CI agreement.
    """
    # ... currently requires forking the repo; install hook in causalrag doctor ...


20I.3 DECI — variational causal discovery
DECI (Geffner et al. 2022) is the variational-inference reference for nonlinear causal
discovery with non-Gaussian errors. Available via the causica package from
Microsoft Research. Used when the analyst wants posterior uncertainty over the
graph rather than a point estimate.

20I.4 LLM-prior fusion
def llm_prior_pc(
    data: pd.DataFrame, *,
    domain_brief: str,
    backend: "OllamaClient",
    base_algorithm: Literal["pc","ges","dagma"] = "pc",




                     CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 98 of 136
) -> CausalGraph:
    """LLM-prior augmented discovery (Jiralerspong et al. 2024 + Ban et al. 2025).


    1. Ask the LLM for an edge-presence prior over column pairs.
    2. Run the statistical discovery algorithm with the prior as a tiebreaker
       on ambiguous independence tests.
    3. Validate every LLM-suggested edge against a CI test on the data.
    4. Surface disagreements rather than overriding.
    """
    prior = backend.query_edge_prior(list(data.columns), brief=domain_brief)
    base = pc_discovery(data) if base_algorithm == "pc" else dagma_discovery(data)
    return CausalGraph.merge_with_prior(base, prior, ci_validator=fisher_z_ci)




                     CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 99 of 136
20J. Sensitivity Analysis — Full Suite
20J.1 E-value
def e_value(
    *, point: float, lo: float, hi: float,
    scale: Literal["RR","OR","HR","diff"] = "RR",
) -> dict[str, float]:
    """VanderWeele-Ding 2017 E-value."""
    # ... per the published formula by scale type ...
    return {"e_value": ..., "e_value_ci": ...}


20J.2 sensemakr (OLS, DML, IV variants)
def sensemakr_ols(model, *, treatment: str, benchmark_covariates: list[str]) -> dict:
    """OLS sensitivity (Cinelli-Hazlett 2020 JRSS-B). PySensemakr Python; R fallback."""
    from sensemakr import Sensemakr   # PySensemakr
    s = Sensemakr(model=model, treatment=treatment,
benchmark_covariates=benchmark_covariates)
    return {"robustness_value": s.robustness_value, "contour": s.plot_contour()}


def sensemakr_dml(*, score_function, nuisance_estimates) -> dict:
    """DML sensitivity (Chernozhukov, Cinelli, Newey, Sharma, Syrgkanis 2022).
    R only as of 2026; dml.sensemakr package."""
    from causalrag.estimators.rbridge._r import require_r_package
    dml_sm = require_r_package("dml.sensemakr")
    # ...


20J.3 Rosenbaum bounds + Bayesian bias priors
Rosenbaum bounds bridge from R packages rbounds, sensitivitymw, sensitivitymv.
Bayesian bias-parameter priors built natively in PyMC: bias_parameter ~ Normal(0,
0.5) on the log-RR scale by default; posterior of ATE is marginalized over the prior.




                    CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 100 of 136
20K. Conformal & Distribution-Free Inference
Conformal causal inference (Lei & Candès 2021, Lei, Sant'Anna, Wasserman 2024)
provides distribution-free finite-sample coverage guarantees on counterfactual
outcomes and ITEs. The PhD-level addition for high-stakes decisions where standard
asymptotic CIs are not enough.
def conformal_ite(
    data: pd.DataFrame, *,
    treatment: str, outcome: str, confounders: Sequence[str],
    cate_model: BaseEstimator, alpha: float = 0.10,
) -> pd.DataFrame:
    """Conformal prediction intervals on individual treatment effects.


    Lei-Candès 2021 weighted conformal procedure with treatment-effect
    nonconformity. Returns per-row [lo, hi] with finite-sample coverage
    >= 1 - alpha under exchangeability of (Y(1)-Y(0)) residuals.
    Reference: nlamprou/conformalInference.fd; CausalConformal in R.
    """
    # ... split-conformal with weighted residuals; return intervals ...




                     CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 101 of 136
21. CLI Design
The CLI is the primary user surface. It is built on Typer, with Rich for formatted
output and Questionary for interactive prompts. Every command updates the
StudyProtocol; every command emits an actionable next-step hint.

21.1 Command tree
causalrag --help
causalrag init [--name NAME] [--tier data-scientist|academic|domain-expert|auto]
causalrag doctor [--install-r-deps] [--install-ollama-models] [--json]
causalrag config get|set KEY [VALUE]


# Phase 1
causalrag discover DATASET
    [--question "..."] [--data-dictionary FILE]
    [--interactive] [--k-dags 3]
    [--treatment COL] [--outcome COL]
    [--exclude COL,...] [--include COL,...]


# Phase 2
causalrag feasibility
    [--mode default|manual|llm-calibrated]
    [--n-floor 100] [--power-floor 0.70] [--alpha 0.05]
    [--effect-band-source user|llm|empirical]


# Phase 3
causalrag hypothesize
    --mode {manual|automated|hybrid}
    [--n 10] [--counterfactual-ratio 0.30]
    [--estimand-mix ATE:0.3,CATE:0.4,RMST:0.2,NDE:0.1]
    [--seed 17]
causalrag hypothesize add
    --treatment COL --outcome COL --question "..."
    [--estimand CATE --modifier COL]


# Phase 4 — full Roadmap walk
causalrag estimate
    [--hypothesis H03|all]
    [--ensemble]                         # cross-estimator triangulation
    [--multiverse-dags]                  # cross-DAG multiverse
    [--cv-folds 5] [--bootstrap 1000]


# Phase 5
causalrag sensitivity
    [--methods evalue,sensemakr,rosenbaum,multiverse,bayes]
    [--benchmark-covariates COL,...]


# Phase 6



                     CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 102 of 136
causalrag report
    [--format html|pdf|md|quarto]
    [--include-llm-rationales]
    [--decision-ledger-position top|bottom]


# One-shot
causalrag run DATASET
    [--question "..."]
    [--auto-confirm]


# Interactive
causalrag repl


# Validation
causalrag validate [STUDY_YAML]


# Reproduction
causalrag replay PROTOCOL_FILE


21.2 Example workflows
21.2.1 Quick look (data-scientist tier)
$ causalrag run claims_2024.parquet --question "what drives 30-day readmission?"
[ok] discovered 47 columns, emitted 5 candidate DAGs
[ok] feasibility passed for 8 (treatment, outcome) pairs
[ok] generated 10 hypotheses (3 counterfactual)
[ok] ran 10 Causal Roadmap walks (avg 47s per walk)
[ok] report written to reports/study_2026-05-13.html


Top finding: hospital_followup → readmit_30d, ATE = -0.087 [-0.121, -0.054],
  BH-adjusted p = 0.003, E-value = 1.94 (yellow verdict).

21.2.2 Academic tier with explicit control
$ causalrag init --tier academic
$ causalrag discover trial.csv --treatment arm --outcome death_30d \
      --question "Does intervention affect 30-day mortality?" --k-dags 5
$ causalrag feasibility --mode manual --n-floor 150 --power-floor 0.80
$ causalrag hypothesize --mode hybrid --n 6 --counterfactual-ratio 0.50
$ causalrag estimate --hypothesis all --ensemble --multiverse-dags
$ causalrag sensitivity --methods evalue,sensemakr,rosenbaum,bayes,multiverse
$ causalrag report --format pdf --include-llm-rationales




                       CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 103 of 136
22. Tiered Defaults
Three user tiers control defaults, prompt verbosity, surfaced knobs, and required
confirmations. Every capability is reachable from every tier; the tier only governs
what is enabled out of the box.
 Setting                        data-scientist           academic                   domain-expert
                                (default)

 Default mode                   hybrid                   academic ensemble          manual with
                                                                                    checklists

 Hypotheses N                   10                       configurable,              1–3 with explicit
                                                         defaults 6                 guidance

 Estimator strategy             top-1                    top-3 ensemble +           top-1 with
                                                         multiverse                 explanation

 Sensitivity defaults           E-value + sensemakr      all defensible             E-value with plain-
                                                         methods                    language verdict

 Multiple testing               BH                       BH + Bonferroni            BH; non-significant
                                                         shown side by side         suppressed unless
                                                                                    asked

 LLM acceptance                 auto-accept              require confirmation       require confirmation
                                                         on role assignments        on every step

 Report verbosity               concise HTML             full HTML + LaTeX-         narrated; minimal
                                                         ready tables               jargon; glossary
                                                                                    inline

 Decision ledger                bottom of report         top of report              rendered as a step-
                                                                                    by-step checklist

 DAG visualization              rank-1 only by           all K candidate DAGs       rank-1 with plain-
                                default                  side by side               language edge labels

 Glossary links                 off                      on                         on (every term)


22.1 Tier auto-detection
causalrag init --tier auto runs an inference:
   •   If R + tlverse are installed → academic.
   •   If terminal is non-interactive (CI environment) → data-scientist.
   •   If the user's git config shows a non-engineering domain or there's a known
       clinical tool (REDCap, etc.) in PATH → domain-expert.
   •   Otherwise → data-scientist (the safe default).
Auto-detection always asks one confirmation question before locking the tier in.




                        CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 104 of 136
23. Interactive REPL
causalrag repl opens a Rich-powered interactive shell. The REPL is the natural
workflow for the academic tier and for one-off exploratory analyses.

23.1 REPL features
      •    Tab completion on column names, hypothesis ids, command verbs.
      •    Live StudyProtocol panel at the top of the screen showing current dataset,
           queued hypotheses, and run estimates.
      •    Special % commands for narrative interactions:
              ◦   %explain H03 — LLM narrates the chosen hypothesis in plain English.
              ◦   %why_failed H05 — LLM explains why Step 5 (identifiability) rejected
                  this hypothesis.
              ◦   %what_if remove confounder X — sandboxed re-run showing the effect
                  on the estimate.
              ◦   %compare H03 H07 — side-by-side comparison of two hypothesis
                  walks.
              ◦   %critique — LLM critiques the current StudyProtocol for missing
                  assumptions or weak choices.
      •    Auto-save: every command persists to the YAML protocol; the REPL never
           loses state on exit.

23.2 Example REPL session
$ causalrag repl
[ok] loaded my_study/study.causalrag.yaml — 47 columns, 10 hypotheses


(causalrag) %status
  ┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
  │ Study: claims_readmission_2026                                  │
  │ Tier: academic                                                  │
  │ Dataset: claims_2024.parquet (n=14,231)                         │
  │ Hypotheses queued: 10      (run: 7    pending: 3)               │
  │ Top finding: hospital_followup → readmit_30d                    │
  │       ATE = -0.087 [-0.121, -0.054]    E-value = 1.94 (   🟡)    │
  └─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘


(causalrag) %explain H03
  H03 asks whether scheduling a follow-up appointment within
  7 days of discharge causally reduces 30-day readmission
  for the cohort of Medicare patients age 65+. The estimand
  is an ATE on a binary outcome under back-door adjustment by
  age, prior admissions, Charlson index, and admission diagnosis.


(causalrag) %what_if remove confounder Charlson




                        CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 105 of 136
  Re-running H03 with Charlson removed from W ...
  ATE shifts from -0.087 to -0.142 (CI now [-0.179, -0.105]).
  Sign unchanged; magnitude increases. Indicates Charlson was
  blocking a true negative confounder of effect.


(causalrag) sensitivity H03 --methods evalue
  E-value: 1.94 (covariate-strength scale)
  An unmeasured confounder would need a risk-ratio association
  of ≥ 1.94 with BOTH treatment and outcome to nullify this.


(causalrag) report --format html
  Report written to reports/study_2026-05-13.html




                    CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 106 of 136
24. Reporting Outputs
Reports are the analyst-facing artifact. They share a single underlying data model
but render to four formats with format-specific affordances.

24.1 HTML report (default)
Single-file HTML built from Jinja2 templates with embedded SVG plots and CSS.
Features:
   •   Collapsible Causal Roadmap sections (Steps 1–8) per hypothesis.
   •   Sortable findings table with traffic-light verdict column.
   •   Hover-tooltips on technical terms linking to the inline glossary.
   •   Search box for navigating large reports.
   •   Interactive multiverse plots (Plotly) where applicable.
   •   Decision ledger as a clickable diff.
   •   Provenance footer with all model digests, package versions, and seed.

24.2 PDF report
Typeset via WeasyPrint from the same HTML source. Suitable for sharing as a
supplementary material, archive, or stakeholder briefing. Uses the same color
palette and typography as the CausalRAG project documents (Charter / Helvetica).
Includes a generated table of contents and page numbers.

24.3 Quarto report
For the academic tier. Emits a .qmd file with code blocks that re-execute against the
saved StudyProtocol. Users can extend the report with custom analyses, add
chunks, and render to HTML, PDF, or DOCX through Quarto's own toolchain.

24.4 Markdown report
Plain text for archival, LLM consumption, version control, and downstream
automation. The Markdown report is the canonical form: HTML, PDF, and Quarto are
all derived from it. Includes structured frontmatter with provenance keys.

24.5 Causal Model Card
Inspired by Model Cards (Mitchell et al. 2019) but specialized for causal claims, the
Causal Model Card is a one-page summary attached to every report. It contains:
   •   The CausalQuestion in domain language.
   •   Point estimate, CI, and traffic-light robustness verdict.
   •   The three most consequential assumptions in plain language.
   •   Top three suspected unmeasured confounders and the E-value defense.



                    CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 107 of 136
   •   The population the answer is intended to generalize to.
   •   Known limitations specific to the dataset and estimator.
The Card is what a clinician, policymaker, or product manager should read first —
and often is the only thing they read. Designing for it forces the underlying analysis
to be honest.




                   CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 108 of 136
25. Packaging, Dependencies & Extras
CausalRoadmap is a single Python package with a generous set of optional extras.
The base install is intentionally minimal so a user can run discovery, feasibility, and
a single Python-native estimator without pulling the entire causal-inference
ecosystem.

25.1 Python version & build tooling
      •   Python ≥ 3.11 required (TypeAlias, Self, performance gains; 3.10 is past EOL
          for new packages).
      •   Capped at Python 3.13 until rpy2 wheels are reliably available for 3.14+.
      •   Build backend: hatchling (via hatch) — modern PEP 517 backend, simple
          metadata.
      •   Dependency resolution: uv for fast local installs and CI; uv pip compile
          produces locked dev requirements.
      •   Lint/format: ruff (lint + format in one tool).
      •   Type-check: mypy --strict on public APIs; pyright in editor.

25.2 Extras strategy
The pyproject.toml defines extras grouped by concern. Users install only what they
need; the base install is fast.
[project]
name = "causalrag"
requires-python = ">=3.11"
dependencies = [
    "numpy>=2.0", "pandas>=2.2", "pyarrow>=16",
    "scipy>=1.13", "scikit-learn>=1.5", "statsmodels>=0.14",
    "networkx>=3.3", "pydantic>=2.7",
    "typer[all]>=0.12", "rich>=13.7", "questionary>=2.0",
    "PyYAML>=6.0", "jinja2>=3.1",
    "dowhy>=0.12", "econml>=0.16",
    "psutil>=5.9",
]


[project.optional-dependencies]
llm           = ["ollama>=0.4", "httpx>=0.27"]
gpu           = ["pynvml>=11.5", "torch>=2.4"]
rbridge       = ["rpy2>=3.5"]
survival      = ["lifelines>=0.30"]                 # + R: grf, survRM2
discovery     = ["causal-learn>=0.1.4", "lingam>=1.9",
                 "tigramite>=5.2"]
ml            = ["causalml>=0.15", "doubleml>=0.9"]
sensitivity = ["PySensemakr>=0.1", "pymc>=5"]
viz           = ["matplotlib>=3.9", "plotly>=5.22",




                       CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 109 of 136
                 "graphviz>=0.20"]
report        = ["weasyprint>=62"]                    # quarto-cli external
dev           = ["pytest>=8", "pytest-cov",
                 "pytest-xdist", "hypothesis",
                 "ruff", "mypy", "pyright", "syrupy"]
all           = ["causalrag[llm,gpu,rbridge,survival,discovery,
                               ml,sensitivity,viz,report]"]


25.3 The R dependency
The [rbridge] extra installs rpy2 only; the R interpreter itself and the CRAN packages
are out of band. Three supported install paths (also documented at §17.6):
      •   Native R install + manual install.packages() for grf, lmtp, sensemakr, MatchIt,
          marginaleffects, mediation, survRM2, bnlearn, tlverse.
      •   Doctor-assisted: causalrag doctor --install-r-deps invokes R from Python and
          runs install.packages for every missing dependency.
      •   Container: ship Dockerfile.r and devcontainer.json with R 4.4 + every
          required package preinstalled. This is the recommended path for users who
          don't want to manage R themselves.




                       CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 110 of 136
26. Testing Strategy
Testing an LLM-dependent package reproducibly requires layered strategies.
CausalRoadmap uses three layers.

26.1 Layer 1 — Cassette-based LLM tests
Every LLM call site has a fixture stored under tests/fixtures/llm/<test_id>.json
containing the prompt and the canonical response. A FakeOllamaClient replays from
fixtures during pytest. CI never touches a real LLM; tests are deterministic and fast
(sub-second per test).
Conceptually similar to vcrpy but custom-built because Ollama's streaming
response format needs structured replay.

26.2 Layer 2 — Golden-output snapshots
For the deterministic-after-LLM artifacts (DiscoveryReport, FeasibilityReport,
EstimationResult), tests assert against syrupy snapshots. Updates require explicit
pytest --snapshot-update; this prevents silent drift.

26.3 Layer 3 — Live LLM suite (opt-in)
pytest -m live_llm runs against a real Ollama backend with pinned model digests
and seeds. Gated behind an OLLAMA_HOST environment variable; runs weekly in CI
on a dedicated runner, not on every PR. This is the canary for model-version drift.

26.4 Property-based testing
Hypothesis (the Python library, not the causal kind) drives property tests for the
StudyProtocol round-trip (serialize → load → equality), the DataFlag combinatorics
(every estimator's required ∩ excluded is empty), and the Roadmap step gating
(every transition's preconditions hold for synthetic inputs).

26.5 Reproducibility tests
A dedicated reproducibility test suite runs the full pipeline twice on a small public
dataset (Lalonde NSW or IHDP) with the same seed and asserts byte-equality on
every artifact. Failures here block release.




                    CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 111 of 136
27. Documentation
Documentation strategy aims for parity with the best in the ecosystem (DoWhy,
EconML, tlverse), with an additional emphasis on honest discussion of limitations.

27.1 Documentation site
   •   MkDocs Material at causalroadmap.dev (or similar), with API reference auto-
       generated via mkdocstrings.
   •   Notebook-driven tutorials via mkdocs-jupyter, executed in CI to prevent rot.

27.2 Tutorial series
   77."Your first causal study in 5 minutes" — data-scientist tier, end-to-end on a
      public dataset.
   78."Reading a discovery report" — domain-expert tier, narrative walkthrough.
   79."Reproducing a published RCT secondary analysis" — academic tier.
   80."Survival HTE with Causal Survival Forests via rpy2".
   81."When the LLM is wrong: overriding the discovery agent".
   82."Stochastic interventions with lmtp".
   83."From hypothesis to publication-ready report".

27.3 Method-comparison vignettes
In the spirit of the tlverse handbook and DoWhy docs: same dataset analyzed by
multiple methods, with discussion of where and why they diverge. Vignettes
shipped at v0.5 cover ATE methods, CATE methods, survival methods, and
sensitivity methods.

27.4 Honest limitations page
A first-class "Limitations & Failure Modes" page exists from v0.1 and grows with
every release. This is the package's intellectual-honesty surface. It enumerates
every way the LLM-assisted workflow can mislead, with examples and
recommended mitigations. The page is linked from the Causal Model Card in every
report.

27.5 Decision flowcharts
Visual decision flowcharts for the two highest-stakes choices analysts face:
   •   "Which estimator should I use?" — branches by data flags and estimand.
   •   "Which sensitivity analysis should I run?" — branches by estimator and what
       assumption is most suspect.




                   CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 112 of 136
27.6 Glossary
An inline-linked glossary covers every term that appears in LLM-generated
rationales. Each entry includes a one-sentence definition, an example, and a link to
the most accessible primary reference.




                   CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 113 of 136
28. CI/CD
Continuous integration uses GitHub Actions. The matrix balances coverage against
cost.

28.1 PR-time jobs
   •   Lint + type-check (ruff + mypy).
   •   Unit tests across Linux × {Python 3.11, 3.12, 3.13}.
   •   Integration tests on Linux + Python 3.12 with the cassette-based LLM suite.
   •   One Windows job (3.12) and one macOS job (3.12) for OS-specific
       regressions.
   •   Documentation build (mkdocs build --strict).
   •   Snapshot diff check (alert on un-updated syrupy snapshots).

28.2 R-equipped CI job
A separate workflow runs on a Docker image preloaded with R 4.4 and the required
CRAN packages. Triggered by changes to causalrag/estimators/rbridge/** or weekly
on schedule. Tests the rbridge adapters against real R sessions.

28.3 Live LLM weekly run
Scheduled weekly: pytest -m live_llm on a self-hosted runner with Ollama installed
and the recommended models pulled. Catches Ollama version drift, model-version
drift, and any prompt-engineering brittleness that the cassettes mask.

28.4 Release workflow
Tagged releases trigger:
   •   Build wheels (hatch build), upload to PyPI.
   •   Build conda-forge feedstock PR (from v0.5 onward).
   •   Publish docs to causalroadmap.dev.
   •   Rebuild + push Docker images (Dockerfile, Dockerfile.r) to ghcr.io.
   •   Generate release notes from CHANGELOG.md.




                    CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 114 of 136
28A. Error Hierarchy & Audit System — Full
Specification
Section 28A through 28C specify the package's error classes, the exception flow
through phases, and the audit log format. The architectural goal is twofold: every
failure mode of an LLM-assisted causal pipeline becomes a named exception, and
every analysis run produces an audit trail that is independently re-checkable
against the artifacts.

28A.1 Exception hierarchy
# causalrag/audit/exceptions.py


class CausalRoadmapError(Exception):
    """Base for every package-defined error."""


# Dataset Lock and integrity
class LockMismatchError(CausalRoadmapError):
    """Dataset hash differs from the Lock recorded in the StudyProtocol."""
class PhantomVariableError(CausalRoadmapError):
    """Reference to a column not present in the Dataset Lock schema."""
class TemporalViolationError(CausalRoadmapError):
    """Confounder measured after treatment, or follow-up beyond observed window."""


# Identification and feasibility
class NonIdentifiableError(CausalRoadmapError):
    """DoWhy/Ananke identify_effect returns no identification expression."""
class OutOfSupportError(CausalRoadmapError):
    """Requested intervention level outside the Data Support Envelope."""
class PositivityViolationError(CausalRoadmapError):
    """Estimated propensity outside [trim_lo, trim_hi] for > threshold of units."""
class EmptyCellError(CausalRoadmapError):
    """Subgroup or treatment arm has n < min_n."""
class FeasibilityFailureError(CausalRoadmapError):
    """Phase 2 filter rejected this (treatment, outcome) pair."""


# LLM-related
class LLMSchemaError(CausalRoadmapError):
    """LLM output failed Pydantic schema validation after max retries."""
class LLMHallucinationError(CausalRoadmapError):
    """LLM proposed a variable, relation, or estimand contradicted by the data."""
class LLMVersionDriftError(CausalRoadmapError):
    """Recorded model digest differs from currently-loaded model."""


# R bridge
class RNotAvailableError(CausalRoadmapError):
    """R or rpy2 not importable."""




                    CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 115 of 136
class RPackageMissingError(CausalRoadmapError):
    """Required CRAN package not installed in the R environment."""
class RRuntimeBridgeError(CausalRoadmapError):
    """R-side error raised during bridge call."""


# Audit aggregation
class AuditBlockingError(CausalRoadmapError):
    """One or more block-severity audit findings prevent report generation."""
    def __init__(self, findings: list["AuditFinding"]):
         self.findings = findings
         super().__init__(self._format())
    def _format(self) -> str:
         return "\n".join(f"[{f.guard}] {f.message}" for f in self.findings)


# Imputation and missing data
class ImputationCreepError(CausalRoadmapError):
    """Outcome value would be imputed at analysis time."""
class InformativeCensoringSuspectedError(CausalRoadmapError):
    """Censoring distribution depends on observed covariates."""


28A.2 Phase-by-phase exception flow
 Phase                Exceptions that can arise                         Default handling

 Phase 0 (init)       RNotAvailableError, RPackageMissingError          Doctor offers --install-r-deps

 Phase 1 (discover)   LockMismatchError, LLMSchemaError,                Block; show diff
                      LLMHallucinationError, PhantomVariableError

 Phase 2              EmptyCellError, FeasibilityFailureError,          Warn-by-default; block in
 (feasibility)        PositivityViolationError                          academic tier

 Phase 3              PhantomVariableError, FeasibilityFailureError,    Drop offending hypothesis
 (hypothesize)        LLMHallucinationError                             from queue

 Phase 4 Step 1-4     PhantomVariableError, TemporalViolationError,     Block hypothesis
                      LLMSchemaError

 Phase 4 Step 5       NonIdentifiableError, OutOfSupportError,          Block; route to §18E
                      PositivityViolationError                          translator or --allow-
                                                                        nonidentifiable

 Phase 4 Step 6-7     FeasibilityFailureError, RRuntimeBridgeError,     Block; recommend
                      ImputationCreepError                              alternative estimator

 Phase 4 Step 8       (none — interpretation can't fail; sensitivity    —
                      might)

 Phase 5              RPackageMissingError (rare path)                  Skip method with warning
 (sensitivity)

 Phase 6 (report)     AuditBlockingError                                Refuse to write report; print
                                                                        findings




                      CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 116 of 136
28A.3 The audit log format
Every analysis writes to .causalrag/audit.jsonl in append-only mode. Each line is a
self-contained JSON record.
{
    "timestamp": "2026-05-13T18:47:21Z",
    "event_type": "audit_finding",   // or "phase_start", "phase_end", "llm_call", "r_call"
    "phase": "P4",
    "step": "5",
    "hypothesis_id": "H03",
    "guard": "G3",
    "severity": "block",
    "message": "Continuous intervention level 12.5 outside support; non_overlap=0.42",
    "lock_fingerprint": "e8a9b1f3c2d4e5f6a7b8c9d0e1f2a3b4",
    "llm_digest": "qwen3-14b-q4_k_m@sha256:abc...",
    "causalrag_version": "0.1.0",
    "runtime_hash": "..."     // python + R + key package versions
}
The audit log is rendered into the report's provenance section. An external tool,
causalrag verify <study_directory>, can replay the log against the artifacts and
confirm consistency — a third-party reviewer can re-check the analysis end-to-end
without rerunning estimation.




                      CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 117 of 136
28B. The Verify Subcommand — Independent Audit
Replay
causalrag verify is the package's answer to one of the hardest reproducibility
problems: how does a third party confirm that the analysis as performed matches
what the report describes? The verify subcommand consumes only the study
directory and re-checks every audit finding, every fingerprint, every claim — without
re-running estimation.

28B.1 What verify checks
   84.Dataset Lock fingerprint matches the current dataset bytes.
   85.Every EstimationResult's protocol_hash matches the StudyProtocol it claims
      to descend from.
   86.Every audit log entry corresponds to an artifact in the study directory.
   87.Every LLM cassette matches the prompt hash claimed in the result metadata.
   88.Every R-bridged result includes the R sessionInfo it claimed to record.
   89.The decision ledger's count of LLM suggestions matches the cassette count.
   90.Every column referenced in the report's findings exists in the Dataset Lock
      schema.
   91.No phase ran without the required guards passing.

28B.2 Verify implementation sketch
from causalrag.audit.verify import verify_study
from causalrag.audit.exceptions import VerificationError


def verify_study(study_dir: Path, *, strict: bool = True) -> VerificationReport:
    """Re-check a completed study end-to-end.


    Reads only persisted artifacts: study.causalrag.yaml, audit.jsonl,
    cassettes/, llm.lock, and EstimationResult files. Does not require
    Python packages used at runtime (e.g., grf) to be installed.
    """
    protocol = StudyProtocol.from_yaml(study_dir / "study.causalrag.yaml")
    lock = DatasetLock.from_yaml(study_dir / ".causalrag" / "dataset.lock.yaml")
    audit_log = list(jsonl_read(study_dir / ".causalrag" / "audit.jsonl"))
    cassettes = list((study_dir / ".causalrag" / "cassettes").glob("*.json"))
    findings: list[VerificationFinding] = []
    findings += _check_lock_match(lock, protocol)
    findings += _check_estimation_provenance(protocol, audit_log)
    findings += _check_cassette_completeness(audit_log, cassettes)
    findings += _check_decision_ledger(protocol, audit_log)
    if strict and any(f.severity == "fail" for f in findings):
          raise VerificationError(findings)




                      CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 118 of 136
   return VerificationReport(findings=findings)


28B.3 The verifier's perspective
A reviewer at a conference, a journal referee, or a regulator can pipe causalrag
verify ./study_dir | tee verification.log and receive an itemized account of which
claims are independently checkable against the artifacts. This is the closest the
package gets to the cryptographic ideal of an end-to-end verifiable analysis — short
of a full proof checker, which is out of scope for v1.0.




                   CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 119 of 136
28C. Reproducibility Replay & Continuous Verification
Beyond verify, the package provides causalrag replay <protocol.yaml>, which re-
runs the full pipeline from the StudyProtocol and asserts byte-equality on every
artifact. Used in CI to catch silent drift from package updates.
def replay(protocol_path: Path, *, mode: Literal["strict","tolerant"] = "strict"):
   """Re-execute a study deterministically and assert artifact equality.


   `strict` mode requires byte-equal artifacts and identical audit log.
   `tolerant` mode allows numerical drift below 1e-9 on point estimates
   and warns on any divergence in the audit log.
   """
   protocol = StudyProtocol.from_yaml(protocol_path)
   # set seeds, pin model digests, reload cassettes ...
   rerun_study(protocol)
   # diff every artifact against the original ...
In CI: a dedicated workflow runs replay on a small public-dataset study after every
PR. If any artifact diffs, the PR cannot be merged without explicit acknowledgment
in the changelog.




                    CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 120 of 136
29. Versioning Roadmap
Three milestones structure the release plan. Each milestone is defined by a feature
set, not a calendar — but rough timing estimates are provided to anchor planning.

29.1 v0.1 — Foundational (target: 6–10 weeks from kickoff)
The minimum viable package. A user can run discovery on a real dataset, get a
feasibility report, generate hypotheses, run the Causal Roadmap walk on one or
more, and read a coherent HTML report.
   •   Core: StudyProtocol, CausalEstimator protocol, EstimationResult,
       CausalGraph, DataFlag system.
   •   Data connectors: CSV, Parquet, SQL (Postgres + SQLite via SQLAlchemy),
       JSON.
   •   Discovery agent: Stages 1a–1e on a single rank-1 DAG (no multi-DAG yet).
   •   LLM: Ollama client; hardware probe; auto-select with 16B floor; cassette
       infrastructure.
   •   Feasibility: power gate for binary-treatment × continuous/binary outcome;
       default + manual modes.
   •   Hypothesis: manual and automated modes; counterfactual ratio control;
       impact scoring.
   •   Roadmap walk: all 8 steps functional; Step 5 uses DoWhy's identify_effect.
   •   Estimators (Python only in v0.1): LinearDML, CausalForestDML, T/S/X/DR-
       learners, AIPW, IPW, PSM (Python causalinference fallback).
   •   Discovery methods: PC, FCI, NOTEARS, DirectLiNGAM via causal-learn.
   •   Sensitivity: E-value, PySensemakr.
   •   CLI: init, doctor, discover, feasibility, hypothesize, estimate, sensitivity,
       report, validate, run.
   •   Report: HTML output with Roadmap-step collapse, findings table, decision
       ledger.
   •   Tests: cassette-based LLM suite; reproducibility check on one public dataset.
   •   Docs: getting-started + two tutorials; honest-limitations page.

29.2 v0.5 — Methodological breadth (target: +3–4 months after v0.1)
Public beta release. The R bridge unlocks the methodological frontier; multi-DAG
analysis becomes the academic-tier default; survival becomes a first-class flag.
   •   rpy2 bridge: grf (causal forest + Causal Survival Forest), lmtp, sensemakr (R),
       MatchIt, marginaleffects.
   •   Multi-DAG discovery with K candidate DAGs ranked by consistency scorecard.
   •   Multiverse runner + specification-curve plots.
   •   Cross-estimator triangulation reporting.


                    CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 121 of 136
   •   Survival pipeline: CSF, RMST contrast, IPCW-DML, survival meta-learners.
   •   Mediation: Imai-Keele via R, CMAverse.
   •   LLM-prior-augmented causal discovery (Jiralerspong-DFS, Vashishtha).
   •   Target-trial emulation scaffolding.
   •   Interactive REPL with the % command set.
   •   Quarto and PDF report formats.
   •   Bayesian sensitivity (PyMC bias-parameter priors).
   •   Rosenbaum bounds via R.
   •   conda-forge release in addition to PyPI.
   •   Docker images on ghcr.io including the R-equipped variant.

29.3 v1.0 — Production maturity (target: ~9–12 months after kickoff)
API stability commitment. Every estimator the package promises to support is in
place; the plugin API is documented and used by at least one external package.
   •   tmle3 / sl3 bridge — TMLE for ATE, NIE, longitudinal.
   •   Bayesian Causal Forest (bartCause, BCF).
   •   Tigramite / PCMCI+ for time-series causal discovery.
   •   Full stochastic-intervention reporting matching lmtp's expressiveness.
   •   Optional cloud-LLM backend (OpenAI, Anthropic) behind explicit --online flag,
       with feature parity.
   •   Hugging Face Hub model selection alongside Ollama.
   •   Plugin API: third-party causalrag-<estimator> packages auto-discovered via
       entry points; at least one demonstration plugin in the wild.
   •   Comprehensive vignette set: ATE, CATE, survival, sensitivity, mediation, IV,
       target trial, stochastic interventions.
   •   v1.0 API stability commitment — no breaking changes without a major-
       version bump.




                    CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 122 of 136
30. Differentiators
Why CausalRoadmap exists when DoWhy, EconML, and CausalML already exist.
Each item below is a specific gap in the current ecosystem that this package closes.
   •   End-to-end exploratory workflow. DoWhy gives a user the four-step
       framework if they already know the DAG, the estimand, and the dataset
       structure. CausalRoadmap provides the zeroth and first steps: from raw CSV
       (or SQL or FHIR) to a candidate DAG and a curated hypothesis list. No
       competitor offers this in an integrated, Pythonic, local-LLM way.
   •   Causal Roadmap as architectural backbone. Every hypothesis walks the
       eight Petersen–van der Laan steps. No competing package enforces the
       scientific/statistical separation at the module level. This is the methodological
       commitment that makes the package defensible at venues like ACIC and SER.
   •   Hardware-aware local LLMs. Most LLM-causal demos assume a frontier API
       key. CausalRoadmap assumes Ollama, defaults to local, and auto-picks the
       best 16B+ model for the user's hardware. A hospital data scientist can run
       the full pipeline on their workstation without sending a single row off the
       machine.
   •   R parity without R fluency. rpy2-bridged adapters for grf, lmtp, tmle3,
       sensemakr extensions, MatchIt, marginaleffects under a single Pythonic API.
       Solves the "I want Causal Survival Forest but I only know Python" problem
       that currently sends users to inferior Python alternatives.
   •   Survival-first. Most Python causal libraries treat survival as an afterthought.
       CausalRoadmap treats RIGHT_CENSORED_OUTCOME as a first-class flag that
       routes to canonical implementations from day one. Timely given the survival-
       method emphasis at recent ACIC programs.
   •   Triangulation by default. Multiverse + cross-DAG + cross-estimator
       robustness are baked into the reporting layer, not opt-in. The Lawlor tripartite
       recipe runs as the canonical robustness check for high-stakes findings.
   •   Causal-aware data prepper. The discovery agent is genuinely novel.
       Pandas-AI, Sketch, lida, and YData Profiling all describe data; none of them
       identifies treatments, confounders, mediators, colliders, IVs, and
       unmeasured-confounder candidates. The DataFlag system is the architectural
       payoff.
   •   Hallucination-honest design. Every LLM artifact is structurally validated,
       statistically checked, and surfaced with provenance. The three-layer gate
       from the original CausalRAG generalizes to four layers and applies
       everywhere the LLM touches the pipeline.




                    CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 123 of 136
31. Failure Modes & Mitigations
The package is designed against specific known failure modes of LLM-assisted
causal pipelines. Each failure mode below has a documented mitigation.
 Failure mode                                   Mitigation

 Causal Parrot effect (Zečević et al. 2023) —   Every LLM-suggested DAG edge must pass a conditional-
 LLM parrots memorized causal facts rather      independence test on the user's data before it is silently
 than reasoning                                 accepted in the rank-1 DAG. Disagreements surface to the
                                                analyst.

 Post-treatment confounder bias — LLMs          Enforce temporal-order checks in Stage 1c and again in Step 4.
 frequently propose post-treatment              Auto-relabel any post-treatment candidate as a mediator or
 variables as confounders                       collider candidate; never silently include.

 Overconfident automation — analyst treats      Every report prominently shows LLM role inferences, override
 causalrag run output as final without          counts, and an analyst sign-off checklist. The one-shot run
 review                                         command is deliberately NOT called auto.

 Hidden non-identifiability — analyst runs an   DoWhy's identify_effect runs for every hypothesis in Step 5.
 estimator on a non-identifiable estimand       Failures block estimation by default; override requires --allow-
                                                nonidentifiable and is logged as red banner.

 LLM version drift — same prompt produces       Model digest pinned in llm.lock; recorded in every
 different output across model versions         EstimationResult; mismatch warning on subsequent runs.
                                                Cassette-based replay for tests.

 R-version skew — different R or package        Every R-bridged EstimationResult records R version and
 versions silently change results               packageVersion() metadata. Report provenance section
                                                surfaces these.

 Multiple-testing inflation from LLM-           BH correction applied by default across all hypotheses in a
 generated hypotheses                           single study. Headline conclusions in the report refer to BH-
                                                adjusted values; unadjusted values shown alongside for
                                                transparency.

 CausalProbe-style brittleness on novel         Domain-tag-aware prompts following the G²-Reasoner pattern;
 domains — LLM hallucinates confidently on      "LLM confidence is low on this domain" banner when column
 out-of-distribution data                       names appear out-of-distribution. Optional retrieval over a
                                                curated knowledge corpus.

 Analyst abdication — silent acceptance of      Analyst-decision ledger records every default accepted and
 every default                                  every LLM suggestion not overridden. Ledger is rendered
                                                prominently in the report (top of report in academic tier).




                        CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 124 of 136
32. Naming Decision Process
This document uses the provisional name CausalRoadmap. The name signals tight
coupling with the Petersen–van der Laan framework, which is intentional: the
package's defensibility at methodological venues rests on that coupling. However
the final name is decided before v0.1 PyPI release, with criteria below.

32.1 Decision criteria
   92.Uniqueness on PyPI and major search surfaces. Required.
   93.Signals methodological rigor without being cryptic to a first-time visitor.
   94.Fits naturally into the PyWhy ecosystem if organizational alignment is
      pursued.
   95.Does not pre-empt obvious naming for related projects (e.g., not so generic
      that a domain-specific spinoff would have to invent a worse name).
   96.Domain-neutral — no oncology, no econometrics, no marketing flavor.

32.2 Final candidates carried forward
   •   CausalRoadmap (provisional default).
   •   causality-lab.
   •   pywhy-explorer (only if PyWhy buy-in is obtained).
   •   drcausal.
   •   causalkit.

32.3 Process
Before v0.1 release: PyPI namespace check, GitHub org namespace check, three-
day notice to PyWhy maintainers if pywhy-explorer is the leading candidate, and a
final commit pinning the chosen name in a NAMING.md decision document.




                    CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 125 of 136
33. Concrete Next Steps — 4-Week Plan
The plan below is for one developer (Brennan) with the existing CausalRAG TCGA-
BRCA codebase as starting reference material. Each week ends with a demoable
artifact.

33.1 Week 1 — Skeleton & Protocol
   97.Create new repo under chosen name; set up pyproject.toml with hatch, ruff,
      mypy, pytest; GitHub Actions matrix over Linux × {Python 3.11, 3.12} plus
      one macOS job.
   98.Implement core/protocol.py — StudyProtocol, VariableSpec, Estimand,
      DataFlag — with full Pydantic models and YAML serialization. Property-based
      round-trip tests with Hypothesis.
   99.Implement core/registry.py and the CausalEstimator Protocol. Port the
      LinearDML wrapper from the TCGA project as the first registered estimator —
      end-to-end smoke test.
   100.     Wire up the Typer CLI with init, doctor, validate (no LLM calls yet).
   101.     Week-1 demo: causalrag init && causalrag validate on a stub project.

33.2 Week 2 — LLM Plumbing & Discovery v0
   102.     Build llm/hardware.py with psutil + pynvml + Apple Silicon paths. Ship
      causalrag doctor that prints the detected profile and the recommended
      model tier.
   103.      Implement llm/ollama_client.py with deterministic seeding, JSON-
      schema retry loop, and model-digest capture. Mock with FakeOllamaClient for
      tests.
   104.     Implement discovery Stages 1a–1c end-to-end against a synthetic
      dataset and one public dataset (Lalonde NSW or IHDP). Produce a
      DiscoveryReport.
   105.     Add cassette-based LLM tests using captured fixtures.
   106.     Week-2 demo: causalrag discover lalonde.csv producing a structured
      DiscoveryReport.

33.3 Week 3 — Identification, Estimation, First Sensitivity
   107.       Implement Stage 1d (flag emission) and Stage 1e (domain expert
      brief). Integrate DoWhy's identify_effect for Step 5.
   108.     Add Python estimator wrappers for LinearDML, CausalForestDML,
      T/X/S/DR-learners. Standardize outputs through EstimationResult.
   109.      Generalize the three-layer hallucination gate from CausalRAG to four
      layers and apply to every LLM call site.
   110.     Add E-value and PySensemakr sensitivity wrappers.



                  CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 126 of 136
   111.    Write the "Your first causal study in 5 minutes" tutorial; make it the
      README example.
   112.     Week-3 demo: a complete Roadmap walk on a public dataset
      producing an EstimationResult and sensitivity numbers.

33.4 Week 4 — Hypothesis Generation, Generalized Power, First
Report
   113.     Implement hypothesize/generator.py with the strategic heuristics
      (coverage, power, novelty, no-post-treatment, counterfactual ratio). Re-use
      the oncology bounding-box code generalized as in §8.2.
   114.     Implement feasibility/power.py with MDE calculators for binary-ATE,
      continuous-ATE, subgroup-CATE. Defer RMST and IV-LATE to v0.5.
   115.    Build the HTML report (Jinja2 + Rich-rendered tables embedded as
      HTML). Include LLM provenance and analyst-decision ledger.
   116.     Cut v0.1.0 tag, push to TestPyPI, open a discussion thread on PyWhy
      Discord introducing the project.
   117.      Week-4 demo: causalrag run dataset.csv produces a complete HTML
      report including the eight-step Roadmap walk for each of N generated
      hypotheses.

33.5 Stretch goal
If time remains, begin rpy2 scaffolding for v0.5. Implement _r.py, ship a causalrag
doctor --install-r-deps that pulls grf and sensemakr, plus a single proof-of-concept
adapter for grf::causal_forest returning a standard EstimationResult. Even one
bridged method proves the architecture.

33.6 Always-on practices from day one
   •   Every commit's CI runs the cassette LLM tests so contributors can develop
       without Ollama installed.
   •   Every PR updates CHANGELOG.md and the relevant tutorial if user-facing
       behavior changed.
   •   The "Limitations & Failure Modes" documentation page exists from v0.1 and
       grows with every release. This is the package's intellectual-honesty surface
       and a real differentiator.
   •   Every LLM call in production code has a cassette fixture in tests.
   •   Every estimator added gets an entry in the method catalog (§19) and a
       vignette by v0.5.




                    CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 127 of 136
34. Glossary
Selected terms used throughout this document. The package ships a more
extensive inline glossary in the documentation site.
 Term                     Definition

 ATE / ATT / ATC          Average Treatment Effect / on the Treated / on the Controls. Marginal
                          expectations of the potential-outcome contrast.

 CATE                     Conditional Average Treatment Effect — the ATE within strata defined by an effect
                          modifier X.

 RMST                     Restricted Mean Survival Time — the expected survival up to a horizon τ; the
                          standard causal target for right-censored outcomes.

 NDE / NIE                Natural Direct / Indirect Effect — the mediation decomposition of a total effect via
                          a mediator M.

 LATE                     Local Average Treatment Effect — the ATE among compliers in an instrumental-
                          variable setting.

 DAG                      Directed Acyclic Graph — the canonical encoding of causal assumptions.

 NPSEM                    Non-Parametric Structural Equation Model — a list of structural equations
                          specifying the data-generating process without parametric form.

 Identifiability          The mathematical property that a causal estimand can be computed from
                          observed data under stated assumptions.

 Positivity / Overlap     The condition that all units have non-zero probability of every treatment level
                          conditional on covariates.

 Exchangeability          Synonym for unconfoundedness; potential outcomes are independent of
                          treatment assignment given covariates.

 SUTVA                    Stable Unit Treatment Value Assumption — no interference between units;
                          consistency of treatment definition.

 Consistency (causal)     Observed outcome under T=a equals the potential outcome Y(a). Distinct from
                          statistical consistency.

 DML / Double ML          Double / Debiased Machine Learning — Chernozhukov et al. 2018 framework for
                          orthogonal estimation with ML nuisance.

 TMLE                     Targeted Maximum Likelihood Estimation — efficient, doubly-robust ATE
                          estimation.

 lmtp                     Longitudinal Modified Treatment Policies — Díaz-Williams framework for
                          stochastic interventions on any exposure type.

 Causal Forest            Athey-Wager nonparametric CATE estimator using generalized random forests.

 Causal Survival          Cui et al. 2023 extension of causal forest to right-censored outcomes.
 Forest

 sensemakr                Cinelli-Hazlett partial-R² omitted-variable-bias sensitivity framework.

 E-value                  VanderWeele-Ding minimum confounder strength required to nullify an observed
                          effect.

 Target Trial             Hernán-Robins framework for designing an observational analysis to mimic the
 Emulation                protocol of an ideal RCT.




                        CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 128 of 136
Term                    Definition

Multiverse Analysis     Specification curve over reasonable analytic choices to assess robustness.

Triangulation           Lawlor et al. 2016 robustness check via independent methods that depend on
                        different assumptions.

Ollama                  Local LLM server that pulls GGUF-quantized open-weights models and serves
                        them via a REST API.

GGUF / Q4_K_M /         Quantized model file formats; suffix denotes compression aggressiveness (Q4 ≈
Q8_0                    4-bit; Q8 ≈ 8-bit).

rpy2                    Python library embedding R into the Python process; the foundation of the R
                        bridge.

FeasibilityReport       The Phase 2 artifact: list of admissible (treatment, outcome) pairs with their MDE
                        and power.

StudyProtocol           The central serializable object holding the entire analysis state.

DataFlag                Routing-relevant property of the data or analysis that determines which methods
                        are applicable.

CausalEstimator         The Protocol implemented by every estimator, Python or R-bridged.




                      CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 129 of 136
35. References
Selected references cited or implicitly invoked in this document. The package
documentation site ships a complete annotated bibliography.

35.1 Frameworks
   •   Petersen, M. L. & van der Laan, M. J. (2014). Causal Models and Learning from
       Data: Integrating Causal Modeling and Statistical Estimation. Epidemiology
       25(3), 418–426.
   •   Hernán, M. A. & Robins, J. M. (2016). Using big data to emulate a target trial
       when a randomized trial is not available. American Journal of Epidemiology
       183(8), 758–764.
   •   Pearl, J. (2009). Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference (2nd ed.).
       Cambridge University Press.

35.2 Estimation
   •   Chernozhukov, V., Chetverikov, D., Demirer, M., Duflo, E., Hansen, C., Newey,
       W., & Robins, J. (2018). Double/debiased machine learning for treatment and
       structural parameters. Econometrics Journal 21(1), C1–C68.
   •   Athey, S., Tibshirani, J., & Wager, S. (2019). Generalized random forests.
       Annals of Statistics 47(2), 1148–1178.
   •   Cui, Y., Kosorok, M. R., Sverdrup, E., Wager, S., & Zhu, R. (2023). Estimating
       heterogeneous treatment effects with right-censored data via causal survival
       forests. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society B 85(2), 179–211.
   •   Díaz, I., Williams, N., Hoffman, K. L., & Schenck, E. J. (2021). Non-parametric
       causal effects based on longitudinal modified treatment policies. Journal of
       the American Statistical Association 118(542), 846–857.
   •   Nie, X. & Wager, S. (2021). Quasi-oracle estimation of heterogeneous
       treatment effects. Biometrika 108(2), 299–319.
   •   Künzel, S. R., Sekhon, J. S., Bickel, P. J., & Yu, B. (2019). Metalearners for
       estimating heterogeneous treatment effects using machine learning. PNAS
       116(10), 4156–4165.

35.3 Sensitivity
   •   VanderWeele, T. J. & Ding, P. (2017). Sensitivity analysis in observational
       research: introducing the E-value. Annals of Internal Medicine 167(4), 268–
       274.
   •   Cinelli, C. & Hazlett, C. (2020). Making sense of sensitivity: extending omitted
       variable bias. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society B 82(1), 39–67.
   •   Chernozhukov, V., Cinelli, C., Newey, W., Sharma, A., & Syrgkanis, V. (2022).
       Long story short: omitted variable bias in causal machine learning. NBER
       Working Paper 30302.


                    CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 130 of 136
  •   Rosenbaum, P. R. (2002). Observational Studies (2nd ed.). Springer.
  •   Lawlor, D. A., Tilling, K., & Davey Smith, G. (2016). Triangulation in
      aetiological epidemiology. International Journal of Epidemiology 45(6), 1866–
      1886.
  •   Simonsohn, U., Simmons, J. P., & Nelson, L. D. (2020). Specification curve
      analysis. Nature Human Behaviour 4(11), 1208–1214.

35.4 LLMs and causal inference
  •   Kıcıman, E., Ness, R., Sharma, A., & Tan, C. (2024). Causal reasoning and
      large language models: opening a new frontier for causality.
      arXiv:2305.00050v3.
  •   Zečević, M., Willig, M., Dhami, D. S., & Kersting, K. (2023). Causal parrots:
      large language models may talk causality but are not causal. Transactions on
      Machine Learning Research.
  •   Chi, H. et al. (2024). Unveiling causal reasoning in large language models:
      reality or mirage? (CausalProbe-2024). NeurIPS 2024.
  •   Wang, H., Han, X., Singh, R., Ma, T., & Chaudhary, V. (2025). CausalRAG:
      Integrating causal graphs into retrieval-augmented generation. Findings of
      ACL 2025.
  •   Joshi, N. et al. (2024). LLMs are prone to fallacies in causal inference. EMNLP
      2024.
  •   Jiralerspong, M. et al. (2024). Efficient causal graph discovery using large
      language models.
  •   Liu, X. et al. (2025). Quantization hurts reasoning? An empirical study on
      quantized reasoning models. arXiv:2504.04823.

35.5 Software
  •   Sharma, A. & Kıcıman, E. (2020). DoWhy: an end-to-end library for causal
      inference. arXiv:2011.04216.
  •   Battocchi, K. et al. (2019). EconML: a Python package for ML-based
      heterogeneous treatment effects estimation.
  •   Zheng, Y. et al. (2024). causal-learn: causal discovery in Python. Journal of
      Machine Learning Research 25(60), 1–8.
  •   Ikeuchi, T. et al. (2023). Python package for causal discovery based on
      LiNGAM. JMLR 24(14), 1–8.
  •   Brodersen, K. H. et al. (2015). Inferring causal impact using Bayesian
      structural time-series models. Annals of Applied Statistics 9(1), 247–274.
  •   Coyle, J. R., Hejazi, N. S., Malenica, I., Phillips, R. V., & Sofrygin, O. (2022).
      tlverse: an ecosystem for targeted learning in R.




                    CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 131 of 136
33A. Multi-Dataset Federation — Architectural Sketch
(v2.0+)
Section 33A through 33D sketch the architecture for multi-dataset causal inference
— analyses spanning two or more datasets that contain similar but not identical
data. Federation is a v2.0+ feature; v0.1 through v1.0 lock the analysis to a single
dataset by design. This section exists to document the architectural hooks already
present in v1.0 that make federation viable, and to record the methodological
commitments before they have to be implemented.

33A.1 Motivating use cases
   •   Multi-site electronic health records — the same data fields collected across
       hospitals, with site as a potential effect modifier or source of confounding.
   •   Pooled analysis of multiple randomized trials — combining trial datasets to
       estimate effects in a target population not perfectly represented by any
       single trial.
   •   Real-world evidence (RWE) bundling — registry data + claims data + EHR for
       the same population, with each source contributing partial information.
   •   Transportability — answering whether an effect estimated in one population
       is portable to another with different baseline characteristics.
   •   Cross-jurisdictional policy analysis — same intervention applied in different
       regions, with regional context as confounding or moderating.

33A.2 What is NOT federation in our terminology
To avoid the term-overloading common in this area, the package draws clean lines:
   •   Single-dataset multi-cohort stratification (e.g., subgroups within one EHR) is
       NOT federation — handled in v0.1 via CATE.
   •   Meta-analysis of published effect estimates is NOT federation — handled in
       v0.1 via the ensemble aggregator.
   •   Federated learning in the ML sense (privacy-preserving model training with
       no data movement) is a specific privacy pattern within federation —
       addressed in §33C below as one option among several.




                    CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 132 of 136
33B. Federation Methodological Patterns
The literature distinguishes three patterns; v2.0 will support all three.

33B.1 Pattern A — Centralized pooled analysis with site indicator
The simplest pattern: all datasets are loaded into a single analysis frame, with site
as a covariate. Treats site as either a confounder (when site predicts treatment and
outcome) or an effect modifier (when site moderates the treatment effect). Tools:
existing CausalRoadmap pipeline + a SITE_INDICATOR data flag.
Limitations: requires full data movement, ignores between-site heterogeneity in
confounding structure, requires single-version schema.

33B.2 Pattern B — Federated propensity score aggregation
Each site fits its own propensity model; the global propensity is constructed as a
mixture using membership weights (probability of site given covariates). The
methodological reference is Xiong et al. 2023 and Guo et al. 2025; the recent 2026
extension by McClean and Díaz addresses the longitudinal case. The package's
architectural commitment: every site exposes a Site Adapter that materializes its
own propensities and density-ratio weights, but never its raw rows.
from causalrag.federation import SiteAdapter, FederatedStudy


class SiteAdapter:
    """Local handle for one site's data in a federated study.


    Exposes a uniform interface so the orchestrator never sees raw rows.
    Each site instantiates its own SiteAdapter and registers it with the
    federation hub. The hub computes only summary statistics, propensity
    parameters, and influence-curve aggregations.
    """
    site_id: str
    lock_fingerprint: str            # local Dataset Lock
    schema_alignment: dict[str, str]    # local-name -> canonical-name


    def fit_local_propensity(self, treatment, confounders) -> PropensityFit:
          ...
    def fit_local_outcome(self, treatment, outcome, confounders) -> OutcomeFit:
          ...
    def influence_curve_contribution(self, estimand) -> np.ndarray:
          ...
    def site_membership_score(self, query_covariates) -> np.ndarray:
          ...


class FederatedStudy:
    """Orchestrator that aggregates SiteAdapter outputs."""
    def __init__(self, adapters: list[SiteAdapter], target_population: dict):



                     CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 133 of 136
       ...
   def federated_aipw(self) -> EstimationResult:
       # collect local AIPW psi_i from each site, aggregate ...
       ...


33B.3 Pattern C — Transportability with target population
The package's most ambitious federation pattern: combining one or more source
datasets (often randomized trials with high internal validity) with a target-
population dataset (often observational, with the covariate distribution of interest).
The methodological literature is anchored by Dahabreh, Robertson, Stuart,
Steingrimsson, and Hernán; the 2024 Annual Review of Statistics review by Degtiar
& Rose is the standard reference.
Estimands supported in v2.0: target-population ATE, transportability estimand under
S-admissibility, target-population CATE, and target-population RMST. The package
will refuse to compute these without an explicit target-population covariate
distribution and an S-admissibility assumption registered in the StudyProtocol.

33B.4 Federated target trial emulation (FL-TTE)
Wu et al. 2025 (npj Digital Medicine) introduces FL-TTE — federated learning +
target trial emulation — validated on Sepsis trials across 192 hospitals using eICU +
MIMIC-IV, and Alzheimer trials across five NYC health systems. The package's v2.0
will integrate this pattern as a high-level workflow: each site runs a local target-trial
emulation, and the federation hub aggregates via influence-curve summation.
Reference implementation: open-source FL-TTE codebase.




                    CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 134 of 136
33C. Privacy, Governance & Communication
Federation in the regulated-data settings the package targets (clinical, financial,
education) is fundamentally a privacy and governance problem, not just a statistical
one. The architectural commitments:
   •   No raw row movement by default. Sites expose only summary statistics,
       influence-curve contributions, and propensity parameters. Raw data is opt-in
       per site.
   •   Differential privacy hooks. The SiteAdapter can be configured with a per-
       query privacy budget; aggregated outputs are noised to satisfy (ε, δ)-DP.
       Reference: opacus or pydp for the noise layer.
   •   Schema alignment with cryptographic proof. Each site signs its schema
       alignment certificate, and the hub refuses sites whose canonical-mapping
       checksums don't match the federation's registered schema.
   •   Audit log distribution. Each site's audit.jsonl is mirrored to the hub; the hub's
       verify subcommand replays the joint audit log.




                    CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 135 of 136
33D. Why Federation Is v2.0, Not v1.0
Federation multiplies every difficulty already present in single-dataset causal
inference. Specifically:
   118.      Three-way schema alignment (site → canonical → estimand) is hard
      even with LLM assistance, and the failure modes are subtler — a column that
      means "hemoglobin A1c percent" at one site can mean "glycated hemoglobin
      units undefined" at another. LLM-based schema reconciliation is an active
      research area; we wait for it to mature.
   119.     Privacy regulations vary by jurisdiction (HIPAA, GDPR, PIPEDA, etc.) and
      the package would need explicit per-jurisdiction modes.
   120.     Federated identification — the assumption set required for a federated
      estimand is strictly stronger than the single-dataset analogue (typically
      requires S-admissibility plus per-site positivity).
   121.     Operationally, federation needs an orchestrator service running across
      organizational boundaries — a deployment pattern fundamentally different
      from the local-only stance of v0.1 through v1.0.

33D.1 v1.0 hooks that make v2.0 viable
Even though federation is post-v1.0, the v0.1–v1.0 architecture is deliberately
designed not to preclude it:
   •   StudyProtocol is dataset-locked, but the lock is a fingerprint, not the dataset
       — multi-site StudyProtocols just carry multiple lock fingerprints.
   •   EstimationResult carries an influence-curve field that aggregates additively
       across sites.
   •   The CausalEstimator protocol's fit/estimate split lets a SiteAdapter wrap any
       v1.0 estimator without modification.
   •   The audit log format is site-namespaced, so multi-site audit logs are merge-
       able by design.
   •   The Data Support Envelope generalizes naturally to a federated envelope —
       the intersection of per-site envelopes.
These design decisions are explicit in v1.0 even though no v1.0 user will exercise
them, because reversing them after release would break backwards compatibility.




                    CausalRoadmap — Project Design Document · Page 136 of 136
